# sample sentences containing the word 'neuron' (regex cells?\W), generated from the neurelectro abstracts
# renaud 20140403
Sensitivity to the pungent vanilloid, capsaicin, defines a subpopulation of primary sensory neurons that are mainly polymodal nociceptors.
The majority of small visceral sensory neurons of the nodose ganglion also express VR1 mRNA, in conjunction with the BDNF receptor trkB but not trkA.
Our data emphasize the heterogeneity of VR1 mRNA expression by subclasses of small sensory neurons, and this may result in their differential sensitivity to chemical and noxious heat stimuli.
The sensory neuron stimulant drug capsaicin stimulates primary afferent nerve endings in the guinea-pig small intestine, which in turn activate myenteric cholinergic neurons by an unknown mechanism.
The tachykinins substance P and neurokinin A are present in primary afferent neurons.
It is concluded that an interplay of neuronal tachykinin neurokinin-1 and neurokinin-3 receptors (ileum) and neurokinin-1, neurokinin-2 and neurokinin-3 receptors (oesophagus) is involved in the contractile action of capsaicin, probably in mediating excitation of myenteric neurons by tachykinins released from primary afferents.
Regulation of L- and N-types of Ca2+ channels by intracellular ATP4- in frog dorsal root ganglion neurons.
The roles of free Mg2+ ions, ATP4- ions and Mg-ATP complexes in the regulation of N- and L-types of Ca2+ channels were studied in frog dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons using the whole-cell patch-clamp technique.
From these observations, it is concluded that L-type and N-type Ca2+ channels in frog DRG neurons are regulated by ATP4- ions alone, and that the neuronal Ca2+ channels are regulated by mechanisms that are different from those regulating the cardiac Ca2+ channels.
Effects of adrenergic stimulus on the activities of Ca2+ and K+ channels of dorsal root ganglion neurons in a neuropathic pain model.
We hypothesized that abnormal activity and adrenergic sensitivity in injured dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons are due to an intrinsic alteration of the cell body membrane.
We investigated the effects of adrenergic stimulus on the activities of Ca2+ and K+ channels of DRG neurons in a rat chronic constriction injury (CCI) model.
The NE-induced inhibitory effects both on N-type VDCC and on KCa channels in injured DRG neurons of the CCI model could lead to cell membrane depolarization, resulting in a spontaneous discharge of action potential and an increase in sensitivity to adrenergic stimulus.
Nerve growth factor (NGF), a member of the neurotrophin family, is crucial for survival of nociceptive neurons during development.
To determine whether NGF has a direct effect on dorsal root ganglion neurons, we have begun to investigate the acute effects of NGF on capsaicin responses of small-diameter dorsal root ganglion cells in culture.
NGF acutely conditions the response to capsaicin, suggesting that NGF may be important in sensitizing the response of sensory neurons to heat (a process that is thought to operate via the capsaicin receptor VR1).
Mechanical stimuli induce intracellular calcium response in a subpopulation of cultured rat sensory neurons.
Cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons from newborn rats were mechanically deformed with a fine-tipped glass capillary, and the change in the intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) was recorded by Fura-2-based microfluorimetry.
We concluded that the mechanical stimulation induced a Ca2+ influx in large dorsal root ganglion neurons through mechanosensitive Ca2+-permeable channels.
A missense mutation in the gene coding for the G-protein-activated inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) channel, GIRK2, is responsible for apoptosis in the external germinal layer (EGL) of the cerebellum and a nonapoptotic death of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in the weaver (wv) mouse.
Cell cycle proteins were not expressed in the substantia nigra, suggesting that nonapoptotic death of mature dopaminergic neurons is not preceded by abortive cell cycle re-entry.
Kv3.1-Kv3.2 channels underlie a high-voltage-activating component of the delayed rectifier K+ current in projecting neurons from the globus pallidus.
Most pallidal neurons are GABAergic projecting cells, a large fraction of which express the calcium binding protein parvalbumin (PV).
Here we show that PV-containing pallidal neurons coexpress Kv3.
Kv3.1 and Kv3.2 channels have several unusual electrophysiological properties when expressed in heterologous expression systems and are thought to play special roles in neuronal excitability including facilitating sustained high-frequency firing in fast-spiking neurons such as interneurons in the cortex and the hippocampus.
Electrophysiological analysis of freshly dissociated pallidal neurons demonstrates that these cells have a current that is nearly identical to the currents expressed by Kv3.1 and Kv3.2 proteins in heterologous expression systems, including activation at very depolarized membrane potentials (more positive than -10 mV) and very fast deactivation rates.
These results suggest that the electrophysiological properties of native channels containing Kv3.1 and Kv3.2 proteins in pallidal neurons are not significantly affected by factors such as associated subunits or postranslational modifications that result in channels having different properties in heterologous expression systems and native neurons.
Most neurons in the globus pallidus have been reported to fire sustained trains of action potentials at high-frequency.
Kv3.1-Kv3.2 voltage-gated K+ channels may play a role in helping maintain sustained high-frequency repetitive firing as they probably do in other neurons.
We show that the Caenorhabditis elegans egl-2 gene encodes an eag K(+) channel and that a gain-of-function mutation in egl-2 blocks excitation in neurons and muscles by causing the channel to open at inappropriately negative voltages.
Using barium as a charge carrier, we show that bFGF and L1 open a calcium influx pathway in growth cones of rat sensory neurons without changing the membrane voltage.
In functioning neurons, this Na(+) influx would cause a larger depolarizing afterpotential, a condition favoring the repetitive discharges, which are signatory of pyrethroid intoxication.
Densities of spontaneously active neurons in slices from both mutants were significantly lower than in control slices.
Spontaneous firing patterns with bursts of action potentials were recorded from approximately 50% of the neurons in control slices, but the typical bursting patterns were not observed in neurons of med-J and jolting mouse slices.
The results suggest that this voltage-gated sodium channel is essential for the spontaneous bursting firing of cochlear nucleus cartwheel neurons.
This mutant animal model may be useful for the study of the functional roles of cochlear nucleus neurons.
Flunarizine improves the survival of grafted dopaminergic neurons.
A major drawback is that only around 10% of the implanted dopaminergic neurons survive.
Flunarizine has been shown to protect neurons against death induced by serum deprivation, nerve growth factor deprivation, oxidative stress, axotomy and ischemia.
This study was designed to investigate whether flunarizine can protect grafted embryonic dopaminergic neurons from death when implanted in a rat model of Parkinson's disease.
Addition of 1 microM flunarizine inhibited cell death in a suspension of cells derived from the rat's ventral mesencephalon and when such a treated suspension was injected into the neostriatum there was a 2.6-fold greater number of surviving dopaminergic neurons, a doubling of the graft volume and a doubling of the volume of the host neostriatum innervated by dopaminergic fibers from the graft, compared with suspensions not exposed to flunarizine.
Tottering (tg) mice inherit a recessive mutation of the calcium channel alpha 1A subunit gene, which encodes the pore-forming protein of P/Q-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels and is predominantly expressed in cerebellar granule and Purkinje neurons.
These dystonic episodes induce c-fos mRNA expression in the cerebellar circuitry, including cerebellar granule and Purkinje neurons, deep cerebellar nuclei, and the postsynaptic targets of the deep nuclei.
We investigated the effect of adenosine A1 receptors on the release of acetylcholine (ACh) and GABA, and on the intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) response in cultured chick amacrine-like neurons, stimulated by KCl depolarization.
The cloned vanilloid receptor VR1 has attracted recent attention as a molecular integrator of painful stimuli on primary sensory neurons.
The existence of vanilloid-sensitive neurons in the brain is, however, controversial.
In this study, we have used an antibody and a complementary RNA probe to explore the distribution of neurons that express VR1 in rat and in certain areas of human brain.
In the rat, we observed VR1-expressing neurons throughout the whole neuroaxis, including all cortical areas (in layers 3 and 5), several members of the limbic system (e.g., hippocampus, central amygdala, and both medial and lateral habenula), striatum, hypothalamus, centromedian and paraventricular thalamic nuclei, substantia nigra, reticular formation, locus coeruleus, cerebellum, and inferior olive.
The finding that VR1 is expressed not only in primary sensory neurons but also in several brain nuclei is of great importance in that it places VRs in a much broader perspective than pain perception.
On the other hand, other types of neurons, expressing both alpha1A(-NP) and alpha1A(+NP), may survive because the positive shift of voltage-dependent inactivation of alpha1A(+NP) compensates Ca(2+) influx.
Q- and L-type calcium channels control the development of calbindin phenotype in hippocampal pyramidal neurons in vitro.
Cultured immature hippocampal neurons from embryonic 17-day-old rats were used to explore activity-dependent regulation of neuronal phenotype differentiation in the developing hippocampus.
The calbindin-D28k phenotype of the pyramidal neurons appeared during the first 6 days in culture, and was expressed by 12% of the cells on day 6.
Daily stimulation with 50 mM KCl during the first 5 days in vitro increased the number of calbindin-D28k-positive pyramidal neurons without affecting neuronal survival.
Omega-agatoxin-IVA-sensitive Q-type and nitrendipine-sensitive L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (VGCCs) carried Ca2+ currents and Ca2+ influx in immature pyramidal neurons at somata level.
Chronic blockade of Q- and/or L-type VGCCs downregulated the normal calbindin-D28k development of immature pyramidal neurons without affecting neuronal survival, the somatic area of pyramidal neurons or the number of GABAergic-positive (gamma-aminobutyric acid) interneurons.
These results suggest that Q-type channels, which have been predominantly associated with neurotransmitter release in adult brain, transiently act in synergy with L-type VGCCs to direct early neuronal differentiation of hippocampal pyramidal neurons before the establishment of their synaptic circuits.
SB-221420-A inhibited (IC(50)=2.2 microM) N-type voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents in cultured superior cervical ganglion neurons, which were pretreated with 10 microM nimodipine to block L-type voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents.
In dorsal root ganglion neurons pretreated with 1 microM omega-conotoxin GVIA to block N-type voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents, SB-221420-A inhibited the residual Ca(2+) current with an IC(50) of 7 microM.
SB-221420-A also inhibited Na(+) currents in dorsal root ganglion neurons with an IC(50) of 8 microM.
Unlike controls, numerous nNOS-positive reactive astrocytes were found in AD patients around beta-amyloid plaques in CA1 and subiculum and at the places of clear and overt neuron loss, particularly in the entorhinal cortex layer II and CA4.
A portion of the nNOS-positive CA2/CA3 pyramidal neurons was found to be spared even in the most affected hippocampi.
A significant inverse correlation between nNOS expression and immunoreactivity to abnormally phosphorylated tau proteins (as revealed by AT8 monoclonal antibody) in perikarya of these CA2/3 neurons (r = -0.85, P < 0.01) suggests that nNOS expression may provide selective resistance to neuronal degeneration in AD.
Unique properties of R-type calcium currents in neocortical and neostriatal neurons.
Whole cell recordings from acutely dissociated neocortical pyramidal neurons and striatal medium spiny neurons exhibited a calcium-channel current resistant to known blockers of L-, N-, and P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels.
The main difference between cell types was that R-type currents in neocortical pyramidal neurons inactivated at more negative potentials than R-type currents in medium spiny neurons.
beta3, a novel auxiliary subunit for the voltage-gated sodium channel, is expressed preferentially in sensory neurons and is upregulated in the chronic constriction injury model of neuropathic pain.
However, of the auxiliary subunits, beta1 is expressed preferentially in only large- and medium-diameter neurons of the DRG while beta2 is absent in all DRG cells.
In situ hybridization studies demonstrated high levels of beta3 mRNA in small-diameter c-fibres, while beta1 mRNA was virtually absent in these cell types but was expressed in 100% of large-diameter neurons.
Results revealed a significant increase in beta3 mRNA expression in small-diameter sensory neurons of the ipsilateral DRG.
These results show that beta3 is the dominant auxiliary sodium channel subunit in small-diameter neurons of the rat DRG and that it is significantly upregulated in a model of neuropathic pain.
Glial-derived neurotrophic factor upregulates expression of functional SNS and NaN sodium channels and their currents in axotomized dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons produce multiple sodium currents, including several different TTX-sensitive (TTX-S) currents and TTX-resistant (TTX-R) currents, which are produced by distinct sodium channels.
We previously demonstrated that, after sciatic nerve transection, the levels of SNS and NaN sodium channel alpha-subunit transcripts and protein in small (18-30 micrometer diameter) DRG neurons are reduced, as are the amplitudes and densities of the slowly inactivating and persistent TTX-R currents produced by these two channels.
In this study, we asked whether glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), which has been shown to prevent some axotomy-induced changes such as the loss of somatostatin expression in DRG neurons, can ameliorate the axotomy-induced downregulation of SNS and NaN TTX-R sodium channels.
We show here that exposure to GDNF can significantly increase both slowly inactivating and persistent TTX-R sodium currents, which are paralleled by increases in SNS and NaN mRNA and protein levels, in axotomized DRG neurons in vitro.
We also show that intrathecally administered GDNF increases the amplitudes of the slowly inactivating and persistent TTX-R currents, and SNS and NaN protein levels, in peripherally axotomized DRG neurons in vivo.
Because TTX-R sodium channels have been shown to be important in nociception, the effects of GDNF on axotomized DRG neurons may have important implications for the regulation of nociceptive signaling by these cells.
Comparison of currents activated by noxious heat in rat and chicken primary sensory neurons.
The vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1) gene is responsible for both capsaicin-, and low threshold (LT) noxious heat-sensitivity in mammalian primary sensory neurons.
Here, we compared LT noxious heat-activated whole-cell currents produced by rat and chicken cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons in order to find out the similarities and differences in the LT noxious heat transduction mechanisms between the two species.
No significant differences between rat and chicken neurons were found in the mean cell diameter of the LT noxious heat-sensitive cells (20.4+/-0.8 microm, n=19 and 20.6+/-0.6
While all LT noxious heat-sensitive rat cells responded to capsaicin, none of the chicken neurons produced detectable response to it.
Lamprey spinal cord neurons possess N-, L-, and P/Q-type high-voltage-activated (HVA) calcium channels.
The N-type calcium channel blocker omega-conotoxin GVIA (omega-CgTx) depressed synaptic transmission from excitatory and inhibitory interneurons.
These effects were accompanied by a depression of the synaptic drive between neurons in the locomotor network.
Voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channels are critical for a wide variety of processes, and play an essential role in neurons.
In the cerebellar nuclei, the cell bodies of cerebellar output neurons showed strong Kv1.5 and Kv1.6 immunoreactivities in the nucleus medialis, interpositus and lateralis.
Interestingly, Kv1.2 immunoreactivity was found in some neurons with their processes.
D1/D5 dopamine receptor activation differentially modulates rapidly inactivating and persistent sodium currents in prefrontal cortex pyramidal neurons.
Several studies have argued that D(1) receptors enhance the excitability of PFC pyramidal neurons by augmenting voltage-dependent Na(+) currents, particularly persistent Na(+) currents.
To provide a direct test of this hypothesis, we combined voltage-clamp studies of acutely isolated layer V-VI prefrontal pyramidal neurons with single-cell RT-PCR profiling.
Contrary to prediction, the activation of D(1) or D(5) DA receptors consistently suppressed rapidly inactivating Na(+) currents in identified corticostriatal pyramidal neurons.
Single-cell RT-PCR profiling showed that pyramidal neurons coexpressed three alpha-subunit mRNAs (Nav1.1,
In neurons from Nav1.6 null mice the persistent Na(+) currents were significantly smaller than in wild-type neurons.
Moreover, the residual persistent currents in these mutant neurons-which are attributable to Nav1.1/1.2 channels-were reduced significantly by PKA activation.
These results argue that D(1)/D(5) DA receptor activation reduces the rapidly inactivating component of Na(+) current in PFC pyramidal neurons arising from Nav1.1/1.2
Mesenteric nerve stimulation (MNS) in the presence of guanethidine and hexamethonium antidromically stimulated extrinsic sensory nerve fibers and cholinergic myenteric motor neurons, resulting in longitudinal muscle contraction in the isolated guinea-pig ileum.
We conclude that NC receptors, distinct from opioid receptors, exist on the capsaicin-sensitive sensory nerve fibers and/or myenteric cholinergic motor neurons in the guinea-pig ileum and that specific antagonists for these NC receptors are not found yet.
The properties of these heteromeric channels closely resemble the properties of I(h) in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons, cells that coexpress HCN1 and HCN2.
Endocannabinoids are retrograde messengers released by neurons to modulate the strength of their synaptic inputs.
Endocannabinoids are thought to mediate the suppression of GABA release that follows depolarization of a hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neuron-termed "depolarization-induced suppression of inhibition" (DSI).
Neurons were filled with biocytin for subsequent morphological reconstruction.
Four neurons were reconstructed and converted into detailed compartmental models.
Two-pore-domain potassium (K(+)) channels are substrates for resting K(+) currents in neurons.
For TASK-1, highest mRNA accumulation was seen in the cerebellum and somatic motoneurons.
TASK-3 was much more widely distributed, with robust expression in all brain regions, with particularly high expression in somatic motoneurons, cerebellar granule neurons, the locus ceruleus, and raphe nuclei and in various nuclei of the hypothalamus.
TREK-1 was highest in the striatum and in parts of the cortex (layer IV) and hippocampus (CA2 pyramidal neurons).
The differential expression of each of these genes likely contributes to characteristic excitability properties in distinct populations of neurons, as well as to diversity in their susceptibility to modulation.
Finally, beta-preprotachykinin (PPT, a splice variant from the PPT A gene encoding tachykinins including SP and NKA) messenger RNA levels as measured by in situ hybridization histochemistry displayed a significant increase in jugular ganglion neurons but not in dorsal root or nodose ganglion neurons.
These data suggest that chronic CS-induced AHR is related to an increase in SP synthesis and release in jugular ganglion neurons innervating the lungs and airways.
These findings implicate ion channels involved in repolarizing dendritic spikes as being central to the process of conditional backpropagation and oscillatory burst discharge in this principal sensory output neuron of the ELL.
Cannabinoid receptor agonists inhibit depolarization-induced calcium influx in cerebellar granule neurons.
The purpose of these studies was to characterize the interaction between endogenous CB(1) receptors and VSCCs in cerebellar granule neurons (CGN).
Subcellular distribution of high-voltage-activated calcium channel subtypes in rat globus pallidus neurons.
Globus pallidus (GP) neurons receive dense inhibitory synaptic inputs interspersed with sparse excitatory inputs distributed across the entire extent of their somata and dendrites.
Yet, despite this predominance of inhibitory influence, GP neurons fire at a high tonic rate, suggesting that intrinsic properties play an important role in determining the physiological characteristics of these neurons.
To better understand the intrinsic properties of GP neurons, we examined the subcellular localization of HVA calcium channels by using immunocytochemistry at the electron microscopic level.
Peroxidase labeling with antibodies against P/Q-, N-, and R-type HVA calcium channels demonstrated the presence of these channels in both proximal and distal dendrites of GP neurons.
Immunogold labeling demonstrated that, although the density of intracellular L-type calcium channel labeling remains constant throughout the proximal-distal extent of the dendritic tree of GP neurons, the density of plasma membrane-bound channels is greater in distal dendrites.
The finding of HVA calcium channels distributed throughout the whole dendritic tree of GP neurons indicates that these channels may interact with synaptic inputs to allow rich processing possibilities for GP neuron dendrites.
In the hippocampus, cells differentiated primarily into interneurons both in the dentate gyrus and in the CA1-3 regions as well as into granule-like neurons.
Mutations of ion channels may be used to modulate the intrinsic properties of neurons, and this approach may generate insight into the degree to which neuronal computations depend upon those intrinsic properties as opposed to the properties of circuits of neurons.
Very recently, a membrane receptor (vanilloid receptor type 1 [VR-1]) sensitive to capsaicin or resiniferatoxin (RTX) was identified in small- and medium-sized dorsal root ganglion neurons that give rise to most unmyelinated sensory fibers.
After vanilloid binding to VR-1, these neurons remain transiently desensitized; that is, less reactive to natural stimuli.
Localization of olfactory cyclic nucleotide-gated channels in rat gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons.
The GT1 GnRH cell lines express all three subunits of the cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels (CNG2, 4.3 and 5) expressed in olfactory neurons.
We investigated using in situ hybridization and double immunofluorescence whether endogenous GnRH neurons in therat also express CNG channel subunits.
In both sexes, 70-80% of GnRH neurons contained mRNAs for CNG2, CNG4.3 and CNG5.
In dorsal root ganglion neurons in culture, 3 microM PGE(2) ethanolamide evoked an increase in intracellular calcium concentration in 21% of small-diameter capsaicin-sensitive neurons.
Here we show that the interaction of the presynaptic metabotropic glutamate (mGlu) receptor subtype, mGlu7a, with the postsynaptic density-95 disc-large zona occludens 1 (PDZ) domain-containing protein, PICK1, is required for specific inhibition of P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels, in cultured cerebellar granule neurons.
Metabotropic glutamate 2 receptors modulate synaptic inputs and calcium signals in striatal cholinergic interneurons.
Striatal cholinergic interneurons were recorded from a rat slice preparation.
Finally, double-labeling experiments combining mGlu2 receptor in situ hybridization and choline acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry revealed a strong mGlu2 receptor labeling on cholinergic interneurons, whereas single-label isotopic in situ hybridization for mGlu3 receptors did not show any labeling in these large striatal interneurons.
Overall, significantly higher release occurred in PM-exposed sensory neurons relative to that of BEAS-2B epithelial cells.
These data show that differential increases in [Ca(2+)](i) and IL-6 release occur in BEAS-2B epithelial cells and DRG sensory neurons, when exposed to PM derived from different sources.
GDNF and NGF reverse changes in repriming of TTX-sensitive Na(+) currents following axotomy of dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Uninjured C-type rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons predominantly express slowly inactivating TTX-resistant (TTX-R) and slowly repriming TTX-sensitive (TTX-S) Na(+) currents.
Changes in Na(+) current profile and kinetics in DRG neurons may substantially alter neuronal excitability and could contribute to some states of chronic pain associated with injury of sensory neurons.
In the present study, we asked whether glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF), which have been shown to prevent some axotomy-induced changes such as the loss of TTX-R Na(+) current expression in DRG neurons, can ameliorate the axotomy-induced change in TTX-S Na(+) current repriming kinetics.
Our data indicate that both GDNF and NGF can partially reverse an important effect of axotomy on the electrogenic properties of sensory neurons and that their effect is additive.
To directly approach the elucidation of the physiological significance of N-type VDCCs in the autonomic nervous system, alpha(1B) subunit (Ca(V) 2.2)-deficient mice were generated, in which peripheral neurons showed a complete and selective elimination of N-type channel currents sensitive to omega-conotoxin GVIA (the peptide toxin from the fish-hunting cone snail Conus geographus), without a significant effect on the activity of other VDCC types.
In isolated left atria prepared from N-type-deficient mice, the positive inotropic response mediated by the sympathetic nervous system was dramatically decreased, whereas the negative inotropic response mediated by parasympathetic neurons was nearly intact compared with those of normal mice.
underlies the 'third TTX-R sodium current' in rat small DRG neurons.
Na(+) channels, respectively, a third TTX-R Na(+) current with fast activation and inactivation can be recorded in 80% of small neurons of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) from E15 rats, but in only 3% of adult small DRG neurons.
Na(+) channels in DRG neurons of E18 rats, at a time when all three currents show comparable densities.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that Na(v)1.5 is expressed in a developmentally regulated manner in DRG neurons and suggest that Na(v)1.5
Decreased large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel activity in dissociated CA1 hippocampal neurons in rats exposed to perinatal and postnatal hypoxia.
Yet, the open probability of BK(Ca) channels was much less in hypoxic neurons than that in the control, because of a decrease in channel open time and a prolongation of the closed time.
Results indicate that the Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel activities in hippocampal CA1 neurons are modulated by hypoxia during maturation.
At higher doses (up to 30 microg/kg) this compound per se reduced GABA release and caused sedation, suggesting the presence of a CCKergic positive tonic modulation on GABA interneurons.
Versatile regulation of cytosolic Ca2+ by vanilloid receptor I in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Analysis of small dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons revealed novel functions for vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1) in the regulation of cytosolic Ca(2+).
In DRG neurons, capsazepine attenuated Ca(2+) influx following thapsigargin-induced Ca(2+) store depletion and inhibited thapsigargin-induced inward currents.
Combined data support topographical and functional diversity for VR1 in the regulation of cytosolic Ca(2+) with the plasma membrane-associated form behaving as a store-operated Ca(2+) influx channel and endoplasmic reticulum-associated VR1 possibly functioning as a Ca(2+) release receptor in sensory neurons.
Mu-opioid receptors are located postsynaptically and endomorphin-1 inhibits voltage-gated calcium currents in premotor cardiac parasympathetic neurons in the rat nucleus ambiguus.
Injection of opiates into the nucleus ambiguus, where premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons are located elicits an increase in parasympathetic cardiac activity and bradycardia.
However, the mechanisms responsible for altering the activity of premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons is unknown.
This study examined at the electron microscopic level whether premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons possess postsynaptic opioid receptors and whether mu-opioid receptor agonists alter voltage-gated calcium currents in these neurons.
Premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons were identified in the rat using retrograde fluorescent tracers.
One series of experiments utilized dual-labeling immunocytochemical methods combined with electron microscopic analysis to determine if premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons contain mu-opioid receptors.
In a second series of experiments whole cell patch clamp methodologies were used to determine whether activation of postsynaptic opioid receptors altered voltage-gated calcium currents in premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons in brainstem slices.
The perikarya and 78% of the dendrites of premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons contain mu-opioid receptors.
Voltage-gated calcium currents in premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons were comprised nearly entirely of omega-agatoxin-sensitive P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium currents.
In summary, mu-opioid receptors are located postsynaptically on premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons.
The mu-opioid receptor agonist endomorphin1 inhibited the omega-agatoxin-sensitive P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium currents in premotor cardiac vagal nucleus ambiguus neurons.
It is possible that the inhibition of calcium currents may act to indirectly facilitate the activity of premotor cardiac parasympathetic nucleus ambiguus neurons by disinhibition, such as by a reduction in inhibitory calcium activated potassium currents.
The possible involvement of potassium channels in central chemosensitivity, with special reference to the Kir1.1 potassium channel, was investigated by studying the CO(2) response of presympathetic neurons in the rostroventrolateral medulla (RVLM) in the absence or presence of various K(+) channel inhibitors.
Synaptic input to RVLM neurons was blocked by local injection of omega-agatoxin and omega-conotoxin.
Activity of RVLM neurons was measured by recording the electrical activity in preganglionic (WR-T(3)) or postganglionic (renal) sympathetic nerves after perfusion of the lower brainstem via the left vertebral artery with CO(2)-enriched saline solution.
Tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channels Na(v)1.8/SNS and Na(v)1.9/NaN in afferent neurons innervating urinary bladder in control and spinal cord injured rats.
Tetrodotoxin-resistant (TTX-R) sodium channels Na(v)1.8/SNS and Na(v)1.9/NaN are preferentially expressed in small diameter dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons.
The urinary bladder is innervated by small afferent neurons from L6/S1 DRG, of which approximately 75% exhibit high-threshold action potentials that are mediated by TTX-R sodium channels.
Following transection of the spinal cord at T8, the bladder becomes areflexic and then gradually hyper-reflexic, and there is an attenuation of the TTX-R sodium currents in bladder afferent neurons.
In the present study, we demonstrate that Na(v)1.8 is expressed in both bladder and non-bladder afferent neurons, while Na(v)1.9 is expressed in non-bladder afferent neurons but is rarely observed in bladder afferent neurons.
In spinal cord transected rats 28-32 days following transection, there is a decreased expression of Na(v)1.8 sodium channels in bladder afferents, but no change in the expression of Na(v)1.8 in non-bladder afferent neurons.
Both bladder and non-bladder afferent neurons exhibit limited increases in Na(v)1.9 expression following spinal cord transection.
These results demonstrate that the expression of TTX-R channels in bladder afferent neurons changes after spinal cord transection, and these changes may contribute to the increased excitability of these neurons following spinal cord injury.
Blocker-resistant Ca2+ currents in rat CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons.
Ca(2+) currents resistant to organic Ca(2+) channel antagonists are present in different types of central neurons.
Here, we describe the properties of such currents in CA1 neurons acutely dissociated from rat hippocampus.
In addition, blocker-resistant Ca(2+) currents in CA1 neurons displayed a characteristically rapid deactivation.
In addition to the functional analysis, we examined the expression of pore-forming and accessory Ca(2+) channel subunits on the messenger RNA level in isolated CA1 neurons using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Of the pore-forming alpha subunits encoding high-threshold Ca(2+) channels, Ca(v)2.1, Ca(v)2.2 and Ca(v)2.3 messenger RNA levels were most prominent, corresponding to the high proportion of N-, P/Q- and R-type currents in these neurons.
In summary, CA1 neurons display blocker-resistant Ca(2+) currents with distinctive biophysical and pharmacological properties similar to R-type currents in other neuron types, and express Ca(2+) channel messenger RNAs that give rise to R-type Ca(2+) currents in expression systems.
Vanilloid receptor (VR1) expression in vagal afferent neurons innervating the gastrointestinal tract.
The distribution of VR1 receptors in peripheral and central processes of rat primary vagal afferent neurons innervating the gastrointestinal tract was investigated by immunohistochemistry.
Forty-two percent of neurons in the nodose ganglia retrogradely labeled from the stomach wall expressed low to moderate VR1 immunoreactivity (VR1-IR).
The epsilon-isozyme of protein kinase C (PKCepsilon) and the vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1) are both expressed in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and are reported to be predominantly and specifically involved in nociceptive function.
Using phosphospecific antibody against the C-terminal hydrophobic site Ser729 of PKCepsilon as a marker of enzyme activation, the state-dependent activation of PKCepsilon, as well as the expression of VR1 in rat DRG neurons, was evaluated in different experimental pain models in vivo.
Quantitative analysis showed that phosphorylation of PKCepsilon in DRG neurons was significantly up-regulated after carrageen- and Complete Freund's Adjuvant-induced inflammation, while it was markedly down-regulated after chronic constriction injury.
A double-labeling study showed that phosphorylation of PKCepsilon was expressed predominantly in VR1 immunoreactivity positive small diameter DRG neurons mediating the nociceptive information from peripheral tissue to spinal cord.
Presynaptic facilitation of glutamatergic synapses to dopaminergic neurons of the rat substantia nigra by endogenous stimulation of vanilloid receptors.
Growing evidence regarding the function of vanilloid receptor-1 (VR1) in the brain suggests potential central roles of this receptor, previously described to occur primarily in peripheral sensory neurons.
In the present study, we used electrophysiological and biochemical techniques to investigate the function and the endogenous stimulation of VR1 in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc).
The endogenous VR1 agonist anandamide (AEA) produced an IRTX-sensitive increase in the frequency of sEPSCs on dopaminergic neurons that was more pronounced when protein kinase A had been activated.
The increase in sEPSC frequency by VR1 onto midbrain dopaminergic neurons suggests the involvement of these receptors in motor and cognitive functions involving the dopaminergic system.
To disrupt this interaction, hippocampal CA3-CA1 pyramidal neurons were transfected with DNA encoding for enhanced green fluorescent protein tethered to VSNL (EGFP-VSNL).
Neurons transfected with alpha1C lacking the terminal five amino acids (DHP-LTCnoPDZ) exhibited attenuated CREB responses in comparison with cells expressing the full-length subunit (DHP-LTC).
We explored this anomaly in chick dorsal root ganglion neurons by comparing Ca current inhibition using GTPgammaS with application of the G protein receptor agonist noradrenaline.
In one set of experiments, capsaicin was administered subcutaneously during the early postnatal period (day 3 after birth) to induce degeneration of afferent sensory neurons in the spinal cord.
In the other set of experiments, interruption of dopaminergic transmission was achieved by two methods: (a) The neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine was used to denervate dopaminergic neurons during the early postnatal period, and (b) haloperidol was used in adult animals to block dopaminergic transmission by receptor blockade.
After testing, the density of pyramidal neurons in the CA1, 2, and 3 subfields of the hippocampus was determined using standard histological and morphometric techniques.
Further, A3AR-/- mice were more vulnerable to hippocampal pyramidal neuron damage following episodes of carbon monoxide (CO)-induced hypoxia.
One week after exposure to CO a moderate loss of pyramidal neurons was observed in all hippocampal subfields of both wild-type (A3AR+/+) and A3AR-/- mice.
GTP gamma S increases Nav1.8 current in small-diameter dorsal root ganglia neurons.
Tetrodotoxin-resistant (TTX-R) sodium current in small-size dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons is upregulated by prostaglandin E(2) and serotonin through a protein kinase A (PKA)/protein kinase (PKC) pathway, suggesting G protein modulation of one or more TTX-R channels in these neurons.
In this study, we investigated the modulation of another TTX-R channel, Na(v)1.8, by GTP(gammaS) in small-diameter DRG neurons from rats using whole-cell voltage clamp recordings.
Nicotinic receptor alpha 7-subunits are coupled to the stimulation of nitric oxide synthase in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.
In dorsal root ganglia (DRG) intraganglionic communication takes place both among neurons and between neurons and satellite cells.
DRG neurons react to ACh-receptor stimulation with NO-dependent cGMP production.
The alpha 7-nAChR mRNA and the protein were expressed in virtually all lumbar DRG neurons as evidenced by laser-assisted cell picking and oligo cell RT-PCR, in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry.
Strong alpha 7-nAChR immunoreactivity was present in vanilloid receptor 1-immunoreactive, i.e. nociceptive, neurons.
The results show the presence of the alpha 7-nAChR subunit in nociceptive rat DRG neurons and provide evidence for its coupling to NOS activation, indicating a role of this pathway in the intraganglionic communication in sensory ganglia.
Using human recombinant TRPV1, 6-iodo-nordihydrocapsaicin (IC(50)=10 nM against 100 nM capsaicin) was about four times more potent than the prototypical TRPV1 antagonist, capsazepine, and was tested against capsaicin also on native TRPV1 in: (i) rat dorsal root ganglion neurons in culture; (ii) guinea-pig urinary bladder; and (iii) guinea-pig bronchi.
Postnatal development and migration of cholecystokinin-immunoreactive interneurons in rat hippocampus.
The development of cholecystokinin-immunoreactive (CCK-IR) interneurons in the rat hippocampus was studied using immunocytochemical methods at the light and electron microscopic levels from early (P0-P8) to later postnatal (P12-P20) periods.
Axons of CCK-IR interneurons formed symmetrical synapses already at P0, and by far the predominant targets were dendrites of presumed principal cells in all subfields of the hippocampus.
Thus, the innervation of CCK-IR interneurons apparently develops later than their output synapses, suggesting that they may be able to release transmitter before receiving any considerable excitatory drive.
We conclude that CCK-IR cells represent one, if not the major, interneuron type that assists in the maturation of glutamatergic synapses (activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors) via GABAergic depolarization of principal cell dendrites, and may contribute to the generation of giant depolarizing potentials.
Among neurons in both areas, directional selectivity was found in all the cue, preparatory, and movement-related responses.
These results suggest that the Kv3.1b and Kv4.3 subunits may differentially contribute to the electrophysiological properties underlying distinct functions of these two retinal interneurons.
The vanilloid-like TRP-channel VRL-1 (TRPV2) is a nonselective cation channel expressed by primary sensory neurons and non-neuronal tissues [Caterina, M.J., Rosen, T.A., Tominaga, M., Brake, A.J and Julius, D. (1999) Nature 398, 436-441].
Low-threshold L-type calcium channels in rat dopamine neurons.
Ca(2+) channel subtypes expressed by dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) were studied using whole cell patch-clamp recordings and blockers selective for different channel types (L, N, and P/Q).
N- and L-channels in DA neurons opened over a significantly more negative voltage range than those in rat dorsal root ganglion cells, recorded from using identical conditions.
These data provide an explanation as to why Ca(2+)-dependent spontaneous oscillatory potentials and rhythmic firing in DA neurons are blocked by L-channel but not N-channel antagonists and suggest that pharmacologically similar Ca(2+) channels may exhibit different thresholds for activation in different types of neurons.
Altered expression of potassium channel subunit mRNA and alpha-dendrotoxin sensitivity of potassium currents in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons after axotomy.
Previous studies have raised the possibility that a decrease in voltage-gated K+ currents may contribute to hyperexcitability of injured dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and the emergence of neuropathic pain.
We examined the effects of axotomy on mRNA levels for various Kv1 family subunits and voltage-gated K+ currents in L4-L5 DRG neurons from sham-operated and sciatic nerve-transected rats.
Patch clamp recordings revealed two types of K+ currents in small-sized L4-L5 DRG neurons: sustained delayed rectifier currents elicited from a -40 mV holding potential and slowly inactivating A-type currents that was additionally activated from a -120 mV holding potential.
Axotomy decreased both types of K+ currents by 50-60% in injured DRG neurons.
In addition, axotomy increased the alpha-dendrotoxin sensitivity of the delayed rectifier, but not slow A-type K+ currents in injured DRG neurons.
These results suggest that Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 subunits are major components of voltage-gated K+ channels in L4-L5 DRG neurons and that the decreased expression of Kv1-family subunits significantly contributes to the reduction and altered kinetics of Kv current in axotomized neurons.
Accumulating evidence suggests that apoptotic and inflammatory factors contribute to the demise of dopaminergic neurons.
In addition, Fas induction was blocked by expression of a dominant-negative c-Jun adenovirus that also protected dopamine neurons from MPTP-induced damage.
Modulation of trigeminal sensory neuron activity by the dual cannabinoid-vanilloid agonists anandamide, N-arachidonoyl-dopamine and arachidonyl-2-chloroethylamide.
To gain a better understanding of the direct actions of cannabinoid-vanilloid agonists on sensory neurons, we examined the effects of these compounds on trigeminal ganglion (TG) neurons in vitro.
2. AEA (EC(50)=11.0 microM), NADA (EC(50)=857 nM) and arachidonyl-2-chloroethylamide ACEA (EC(50)=14.0 microM) each evoked calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) release from TG neurons.
AEA, ACEA and CAP stimulated cAMP accumulation in TG neurons in a calcium- and TRPV1-dependent fashion.
We conclude that the major action of AEA, NADA and ACEA on TG neurons is excitatory, while, of these, only NADA is pungent.
Ischemia-related change of ceruloplasmin immunoreactivity in neurons and astrocytes in the gerbil hippocampus and dentate gyrus.
These data indicate that P2Y receptors on the terminals of capsaicin-sensitive cutaneous sensory neurons effectively evoke nociceptive transmission, and support the hypothesis that UTP may be an endogenous nociceptive messenger.
Deletion of vanilloid receptor 1-expressing primary afferent neurons for pain control.
Inhibition or removal of certain nociceptive neurons, while retaining all other sensory modalities and motor function, would represent a new therapeutic approach to control severe pain.
The enriched expression of transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 1 (TRPV1; also known as the vanilloid receptor, VR1) in nociceptive neurons of the dorsal root and trigeminal ganglia allowed us to test this concept.
Administration of the potent TRPV1 agonist resiniferatoxin (RTX) to neuronal perikarya induces calcium cytotoxicity by opening the TRPV1 ion channel and selectively ablates nociceptive neurons.
In human dorsal root ganglion cultures, RTX induced a prolonged increase in intracellular calcium in vanilloid-sensitive neurons, while leaving other, adjacent neurons unaffected.
Regional distribution of SK3 mRNA-containing neurons in the adult and adolescent rat ventral midbrain and their relationship to dopamine-containing cells.
SK3 small conductance, calcium-activated potassium channels play an important role in regulating the activity of mesencephalic dopamine (DA) neurons.
SK3 mRNA was found exclusively in areas that also contained large numbers of DA neurons including the substantia nigra (SN), the ventral tegmental area, and related cell groups (VTA-A10).
Electrophysiological recordings were performed from single pyramidal neurons from a slice preparation.
Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from isolated neocortical neurons revealed that LEV significantly reduced N-, and partially P/Q-type high-voltage-activated (HVA) Ca2+ currents, whereas sodium currents were unaffected.
Transmitter release in neurons is triggered by intracellular Ca2+ increase via the opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels.
FHF2 is abundantly expressed in the hippocampus and DRG neurons and colocalizes with Na(v)1.6 at mature nodes of Ranvier in myelinated sensory fibers in the dorsal root of the sciatic nerve.
However, retinal ganglion cells and spinal ventral horn motor neurons show very low levels of FHF2 expression, and their axons exhibit no nodal FHF2 staining within the optic nerve and ventral root, respectively.
The preferential expression of FHF2B in sensory neurons may provide a basis for physiological differences in sodium currents that have been reported at the nodes of Ranvier in sensory versus motor axons.
Pranidipine significantly suppressed KCl-induced intracellular calcium changes ([Ca(2+)](i)) in a dose-dependent fashion in dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Furthermore, it exerts an antinociceptive effect, which might be related to an attenuation of synaptic transmission by nociceptive neurons due to the blocking effect of pranidipine on N-type calcium channels in primary nociceptive afferent fibers.
Voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channels from the Kv4, or Shal-related, gene family underlie a major component of the A-type potassium current in mammalian central neurons.
For example, immunoreactivity for KChIP1 and Kv4.3 is concentrated in the somata and dendrites of hippocampal, striatal, and neocortical interneurons.
Double-label immunofluorescence labeling revealed that throughout the forebrain, KChIP2 and KChIP4 are frequently colocalized with Kv4.2, whereas in cortical, hippocampal, and striatal interneurons, KChIP1 is frequently colocalized with Kv4.3.
Vanilloid receptor VR1-positive primary afferents are glutamatergic and contact spinal neurons that co-express neurokinin receptor NK1 and glutamate receptors.
To confirm the hypothesis that VR1-positive primary afferents are glutamatergic and contact spinal neurons that express the main classes of ionotropic glutamate receptors, we performed multiple immunofluorescent staining for VR1 and the glutamate transporter VGLUT2 (a specific marker for glutamatergic transmission) or AMPA and NMDA receptor subunits.
Based on our previous observations of preferential targeting of VR1-positive primary afferents to spinal neurons that express the neurokinin receptor NK1 (Hwang et al., 2003), we further quantified the frequency of termination of VR1-positive afferents onto NK1-positive neurons co-expressing glutamate receptors.
The immunosuppressant FK506 activates capsaicin- and bradykinin-sensitive DRG neurons and cutaneous C-fibers.
In order to elucidate the mechanisms underlying transient burning sensation elicited by topical application of FK506 to the skin of atopic patients, we investigated if FK506 directly activates sensory neurons and fibers, or not.
Ca(2+) imaging study on cultured DRG neurons of rats revealed that application of FK506 raised intracellular Ca(2+) levels in a subpopulation of small DRG neurons (3.1% of DRG neurons responsive to high K(+) solution).
FK506 sensitive neurons also responded to a subsequent application of capsaicin (89.5% in normal, and 100% in inflamed rats) and bradykinin (31.6% in normal, and 80.9% in inflamed rats).
In situ hybridization (ISH), RT-PCR analysis of laser-microdissected cells, and immunocytochemistry revealed absence of TNFalpha from DRG neurons and LPS-induced expression of TNFalpha exclusively in a subpopulation of non-neuronal DRG cells.
TNFR1 mRNA was expressed in virtually all neurons and in non-neuronal cells with increased levels after LPS in both.
RT-PCR analysis of microdissected DRG neurons and of the sensory neuronal cell line F11 confirmed the neuronal expression of TNFR1 and excluded that of TNFR2.
Double ISH revealed varying levels of TNFR1 mRNA in virtually all DRG neurons including putative nociceptive neurons coding for calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P, or vanilloid receptor 1. Taken together, we provide evidence that non-neuronally synthesized TNFalpha may directly act on primary afferent neurons via TNFR1 but not TNFR2.
Substance P expression in TRPV1 and trkA-positive dorsal root ganglion neurons innervating the mouse lung.
In the present study, the co-localisation of substance P (SP) with the vanilloid receptor TRPV1 and the neurotrophin receptor tyrosine kinase trkA was analysed in airway-specific murine dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons.
DRG neurons labelled with Fast Blue were predominantly found at the segmental levels T2-T5.
Immunoreactivity for the receptor TRPV1 was localized to 12% of Fast Blue labelled DRG neurons.
Double-labelling immunohistochemistry revealed that a substantial number of them also co-express SP (7.6 +/- 1.1% (mean +/- S.E.M.)), whereas neurons with immunoreactivity for TRPV1 only were found in 4.4 +/- 1.3% of the retrogradely labelled neuronal population.
Further analysis of retrogradely labelled neurons showed that their majority expressed trkA (62.8 +/- 1.4%), neurofilament protein 68-kDa (64.8 +/- 1.5%) or glutamate alone (19.5 +/- 1.9%).
SP was always expressed in trkA-positive neurons.
Based on the extent of co-localization of SP with the receptors TRPV1 and trkA in DRG airway neurons, the present study indicates that the DRG pathway may have effects on the magnitude of neurogenic inflammation in airway diseases such as asthma.
Dynamics of fast synaptic excitation during trains of stimulation in myenteric neurons of guinea-pig ileum.
This process may contribute to the generation of both ongoing and movement-evoked pain, resulting from the activation of sensory neurons that detect noxious stimuli (nociceptors).
Here, we show that TRPV1 is present on sensory neuron fibers that innervate the mouse femur and that, in an in vivo model of bone cancer pain, acute or chronic administration of a TRPV1 antagonist or disruption of the TRPV1 gene results in a significant attenuation of both ongoing and movement-evoked nocifensive behaviors.
Determinants of postsynaptic Ca2+ signaling in Purkinje neurons.
Neuronal integration in Purkinje neurons involves many forms of Ca2+ signaling.
Unlike most other types of central neurons, Purkinje neurons do not express NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors (NMDARs).
AMPARs in Purkinje neurons are characterized by a low permeability for Ca2+ ions.
A new type of neuron specifically associated with the mossy fibre system.
Calretinin-positive neurons and processes were most abundant in the hilus of the dentate gyrus and in the stratum lucidum of the CA3 region.
Inhibition of persistent sodium current fraction and voltage-gated L-type calcium current by propofol in cortical neurons: implications for its antiepileptic activity.
These results were integrated with a patch-clamp analysis of Na(+) and high-voltage activated (HVA) calcium (Ca(2+)) currents from isolated cortical neurons.
However, propofol reduced both the duration and the number of spikes of PDSs recorded from cortical neurons.
These results suggest that propofol modulates neuronal excitability by selectively suppressing persistent Na(+) currents and L-type HVA Ca(2+) conductances in cortical neurons.
Vanilloid receptor 1 (also called TRPV1) is an ion channel that mediates inflammatory thermal nociception and is present on sensory neurons.
Here we demonstrate that both insulin and IGF-I enhance TRPV1-mediated membrane currents in heterologous expression systems and cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Because of the role of T-channels in determining the intrinsic firing patterns of neurons involved in absence seizures, it was suggested that these SNPs might alter channel function.
Computer simulations predict that seven of the SNPs would increase firing of neurons, with three of them inducing oscillations at similar frequencies, as observed during absence seizures.
The R788C SNP altered activity in a manner that would also lead to enhanced burst firing of neurons.
trkA is expressed in nociceptive neurons and influences electrophysiological properties via Nav1.8 expression in rapidly conducting nociceptors.
To test the hypothesis that trkA (the high-affinity NGF receptor) is selectively expressed in nociceptive dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, we examined the intensity of trkA immunoreactivity in single dye-injected rat DRG neurons, the sensory receptor properties of which were identified in vivo with mechanical and thermal stimuli.
We provide the first evidence in single identified neurons that strong trkA expression in DRGs is restricted to nociceptive neurons, probably accounting for the profound influence of NGF on these neurons.
NGF can influence electrophysiological properties of DRG neurons, probably by binding to trkA.
In situ hybridization evidence for the coexistence of ASIC and TRPV1 within rat single sensory neurons.
Histological relations among ASIC clones and the colocalization of each ASIC subunit and TRPV1 within single sensory neurons were examined on serial sections of rat dorsal root ganglia (DRG) using in situ hybridization histochemistry.
ASIC1a transcripts were expressed in 20-25% of the DRG neurons, and most of the neurons had small (<30 microm)-diameter cell bodies.
ASIC1b transcripts and ASIC3 transcripts were expressed in approximately 10% and 30-35% of the DRG neurons, respectively, and the greater part of each population was located in small-to-medium (30-50 microm)-diameter cells.
The ASIC1a transcripts and ASIC1b transcripts were basically localized in the distinct populations of the DRG neurons, while approximately 20% of the ASIC1a-positive neurons and approximately 10% of the ASIC1b-positive neurons expressed ASIC3 transcripts.
TRPV1 transcripts were expressed in 35-40% of the DRG neurons, and most of the TRPV1-positive neurons had small-diameter cell bodies.
Intense expression signals for ASIC1a transcripts were detected in 40-45% of the TRPV1-positive neurons.
Neurons expressing both ASIC1b and TRPV1 transcripts were barely detected in the DRG.
Approximately 30% of the TRPV1-positive neurons expressed ASIC3 transcripts, and the double-labeled neurons were comprised of both small-diameter and medium-diameter cells.
Approximately 13% of the TRPV1-positive neurons expressed both ASIC1a and ASIC3 transcripts.
RSK1 is expressed at highest levels in cerebellum, especially in granule neurons and within neuropil of the molecular layer.
RSK1 expression is also prominent in many large pyramidal neurons throughout the brain.
At the subcellular level, RSK1 is highly concentrated in the golgi apparatus of both neurons and astroglia.
In contrast, MSK1 is expressed at highest levels in striatal and olfactory tubercle neurons and to a lesser degree in cerebellar Purkinje cells.
Mutually exclusive glomerular innervation by two distinct types of olfactory sensory neurons revealed in transgenic zebrafish.
The olfactory epithelium of fish contains two major types of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) that are distinct morphologically (ciliated vs microvillous) and possibly functionally.
The study of the TRPC cation channels as signal transducers in sensory neurons is in its infancy.
We investigated the distribution of TRPC1 and TRPC3-7 in nodose sensory neurons and in their peripheral axons that terminate as mechanosensitive receptors in the aortic arch of the rat.
Using immunocytochemical techniques we identified these six TRPC proteins in the soma of the nodose neurons but only TRPC1 and TRPC3-5 were found to distribute to the peripheral axons and the mechanosensory terminals.
Na(v)1.8 and Na(v)1.9 generate slowly inactivating (I(TTXr-Slow)) and persistent (I(TTXr-Per)) currents in sensory neurons that are tetrodotoxin-resistant.
Identification of dopaminergic neurons of nigral and ventral tegmental area subtypes in grafts of fetal ventral mesencephalon based on cell morphology, protein expression, and efferent projections.
Transplants of fetal ventral mesencephalic tissue are known to contain a mixture of two major dopamine (DA) neuron types: the A9 neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and the A10 neurons of the ventral tegmental area (VTA).
Previous studies have suggested that these two DA neuron types may differ in their growth characteristics, but, because of technical limitations, it has so far been difficult to identify the two subtypes in fetal ventral mesencephalon (VM) grafts and trace their axonal projections.
The expression of the GFP reporter allowed for visualization of the grafted DA neurons and their axonal projections within the host brain.
We show that the SNpc and VTA neuron subtypes in VM grafts can be identified on the basis of their morphology and location within the graft, and their expression of a G-protein-gated inwardly rectifying K+ channel subunit (Girk2) and calbindin, respectively, and also that the axonal projections of the two DA neuron types are markedly different.
By retrograde axonal tracing, we show that dopaminergic innervation of the striatum is derived almost exclusively from the Girk2-positive SNpc cells, whereas the calbindin-positive VTA neurons project to the frontal cortex and probably also other forebrain areas.
The results suggest the presence of axon guidance and target recognition mechanisms in the DA-denervated forebrain that can guide the growing axons to their appropriate targets and indicate that cell preparations used for cell replacement in Parkinson's disease will be therapeutically useful only if they contain cells capable of generating the correct nigral DA neuron phenotype.
Short hairpin RNA-mediated selective knockdown of NaV1.8 tetrodotoxin-resistant voltage-gated sodium channel in dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Transduction of HEK293 cells stably expressing NaV1.8 or primary dorsal root ganglion neurons with lentivirus expressing short hairpin RNA resulted in the knockdown of NaV1.8 protein and messenger RNA concentrations.
A selective knockdown of NaV1.8 expression in dorsal root ganglion neurons can be attained by short hairpin RNA delivered with lentivirus.
Neurochemical and electrophysiological characteristics of rat striatal neurons in primary culture.
Neurons maintained in dispersed primary culture offer a number of advantages as a model system and are particularly well-suited for studies of the intrinsic electrical properties of neurons by patch clamp.
We have characterized the immunocytochemical and electrophysiological properties of cultured rat striatal neurons as they develop in vitro in order to compare this model system with the known properties found in vivo.
We found a high abundance of cells in vitro corresponding to the principal striatal output neuron, the medium spiny neuron.
Immunocytochemical studies indicate that these cells have both dopamine-1 and dopamine-2 receptors and that there is overlap in their expression within the population of neurons.
Semiquantitative analysis revealed bimodal distributions of dopamine receptor expression among the population of neurons.
Current clamp studies reveal complex spontaneous firing patterns in a subset of neurons, including bursting behaviors superimposed on a slow depolarization.
Sensorineural hearing loss is often associated with damage of cochlear hair cells and/or of the neurons of the auditory pathway.
Since exposure to novel environments activates locus coeruleus neurons, norepinephrine may mediate the change in EPSP slope inhibition reported in awake rats.
A-type K(+) currents (I(A)) in olfactory receptor neurons have been characterized electrophysiologically but the molecular identities of the underlying channel subunits have not been determined.
Together with our previous studies, our data suggest that A-type K(+) currents in olfactory receptor neurons are composed of multiple K(+) channel subunits, among which Kv1.4 and Kv4.2 are subject to transcriptional modulation by PACAP.
Modulation of A-type K(+) current expression may contribute to the previously observed neuroprotective effects of PACAP on olfactory receptor neurons.
relative to MM; p<0.05) in neurons from L4 to L5 dorsal root ganglia and significantly attenuated mechanical allodynia following intraplantar complete Freund's adjuvant.
The proportion of fluorogold-traced dorsal root ganglion neurons expressing each of these markers was compared with untraced neurons.
TRPA1, a member of the transient receptor potential (TRP) family of ion channels, is expressed by dorsal root ganglion neurons and by cells of the inner ear, where it has proposed roles in sensing sound, painful cold, and irritating chemicals.
TRPA1 is apparently not essential for hair-cell transduction but contributes to the transduction of mechanical, cold, and chemical stimuli in nociceptor sensory neurons.
Characterization of sensory neuron subpopulations selectively expressing green fluorescent protein in phosphodiesterase 1C BAC transgenic mice.
In this study, we have examined phosphodiesterase 1C (Pde1c) BAC transgenic mice in which a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene reflects Pde1c expression in sensory neuron subpopulations in the dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord.
Using double labeling immunofluorescence, we demonstrate GFP expression in specific subpopulations of primary sensory neurons and a distinct neuronal expression pattern within the spinal cord dorsal horn.
In the dorsal root ganglia, their distribution is restricted to those subpopulations of primary sensory neurons that give rise to unmyelinated C fibers (neurofilament 200 negative).
GFP was also expressed in a subpopulation of the primary sensory neurons immunoreactive for the vanilloid receptor TRPV1 and the ATP-gated ion channel P2X3.
In the spinal cord dorsal horn, GFP positive neurons were largely restricted to lamina I and to a lesser extent lamina II, but surprisingly did not coexpress markers for key neuronal populations present in the superficial dorsal horn.
The expression of GFP in subclasses of nociceptors and also in dorsal horn regions densely innervated by nociceptors suggests that Pde1c marks a unique subpopulation of nociceptive sensory neurons.
Significance in mice Purkinje neurons.
Resurgent currents are functionally crucial in sustaining the high frequency firing of cerebellar Purkinje neurons expressing Na(v)1.6 channels.
Inactivation of sodium channel Scn8A (Na-sub(v)1.6) in Purkinje neurons impairs learning in Morris water maze and delay but not trace eyeblink classical conditioning.
To examine the isolated effects of altered currents in cerebellar Purkinje neurons, the authors used Scn8a-super(flox/flox), Purkinje cell protein-CRE (Pcp-CRE) mice in which Exon 1 of Scn8a is deleted only in Purkinje neurons.
Voltage-dependent ionic currents, including low-threshold potassium currents, influence excitability of neurons in these circuits and thereby regulate motor output and sensory filtering.
Although Kv1-like potassium channels are likely to carry low-threshold potassium currents in electromotor and electrosensory neurons, the distribution of Kv1 alpha subunits in A.
Each Kv1 antibody labeled a distinct subset of neurons, fibers, and/or dendrites in electromotor and electrosensory nuclei.
Similarly, Kv1-like immunoreactivity in the pacemaker nucleus is consistent with a role of Kv1 channels in spontaneous high-frequency firing in pacemaker neurons.
TASK-like conductances are present within hippocampal CA1 stratum oriens interneuron subpopulations.
Recent evidence suggests that these channels contribute to the resting potential and input resistance in several neuron types, including hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells.
However, the evidence for TWIK-related acid-sensitive potassium (TASK)-like conductances in inhibitory interneurons is less clear, and mRNA expression has suggested that TASK channels are expressed in only a subpopulation of interneurons.
Here we use immunocytochemistry to demonstrate prominent TASK-3 protein expression in both parvalbumin-positive- and a subpopulation of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)67-positive interneurons.
In addition, a TASK-like current (modulated by both pH and bupivacaine) was detected in 30-50% of CA1 stratum oriens interneurons of various morphological classes.
In most neurons, basic shifts in pH had a larger effect on the TASK-like current than acidic, suggesting that the current is mediated by TASK-1/TASK-3 heterodimers.
These data suggest that TASK-like conductances are more prevalent in inhibitory interneurons than previously supposed.
Multiple types of Na(+) currents mediate action potential electrogenesis in small neurons of mouse dorsal root ganglia.
Small (<25 microm in diameter) neurons of the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) express multiple voltage-gated Na(+) channel subtypes, two of which being resistant to tetrodotoxin (TTX).
However, it is not known how each type of Na(+) channel contributes to the generation of action potentials in small DRG neurons.
Therefore, we investigated the correlation between Na(+) currents in voltage-clamp recordings and corresponding action potentials in current-clamp recordings, using wild-type (WT) and Na(V)1.8 knock-out (KO) mice, to clarify the action potential electrogenesis in small DRG neurons.
We classified Na(+) currents in small DRG neurons into three categories on the basis of TTX sensitivity and kinetic properties, i.e., TTX-sensitive (TTX-S)/fast Na(+) current, TTX-resistant (TTX-R)/slow Na(+) current, and TTX-R/persistent Na(+) current.
Our concurrent voltage- and current-clamp recordings from the same neuron revealed that the action potentials in WT small DRG neurons were mainly dependent on TTX-R/slow Na(+) current mediated by Na(V)1.8.
It was surprising that a large portion of TTX-S/fast Na(+) current was switched off in WT small DRG neurons due to a hyperpolarizing shift of the steady-state inactivation (h (infinity)), whereas in KO small DRG neurons which are devoid of TTX-R/slow Na(+) current, the action potentials were generated by TTX-S/fast Na(+) current possibly through a compensatory shift of h (infinity) in the positive direction.
We also confirmed that TTX-R/persistent Na(+) current mediated by Na(V)1.9 actually regulates subthreshold excitability in small DRG neurons.
Thus, our results indicate that the action potentials in small DRG neurons are generated and regulated with a combination of multiple mechanisms that may give rise to unique functional properties of small DRG neurons.
TRPV1 strongly labeled laminae I and II of dorsal horns, most small-size and some medium-size DRG neurons, and small-diameter axons of dorsal roots.
NKA (5 x 10(-7) - 10(-6) M), a related tachykinin coexpressed with SP in primary sensory neurons, enhanced the basal release of Gly.
Here we show that the EP4 receptor subtype is expressed by a subset of primary sensory dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, and that its levels, but not that of the other EP1-3 subtypes, increase in the DRG after complete Freund' adjuvant-induced peripheral inflammation.
AH23848 also reduces the PGE(2)-mediated sensitization of capsaicin-evoked currents in DRG neurons in vitro.
Vanilloid-mediated heterosynaptic facilitation of inhibitory synaptic input to neurons of the rat dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.
We examined the role of VR1 in regulating synaptic inputs to neurons of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV).
Using patch-clamp recordings from DMV neurons in brainstem slices, capsaicin was found to increase action potential-independent inhibitory input onto DMV neurons.
The VR1-mediated facilitation of synaptic inhibition was reduced by ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonists, suggesting an indirect, heterosynaptic enhancement of GABA release caused by a VR1-mediated increase in glutamate release from presynaptic terminals of excitatory neurons.
Results of these studies suggest that VR1-containing glutamatergic terminals contact DMV neurons.
Endogenous cannabinoids can thereby rapidly enhance inhibitory input to DMV neurons via VR1-mediated presynaptic mechanisms.
Olopatadine attenuates the enhancement of capsaicin-evoked substance P release by bradykinin from cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
In the present study, using a highly sensitive radioimmunoassay for substance P, we observed that olopatadine attenuated the enhancement of capsaicin-induced substance P release by bradykinin with an IC(50) value of 12.5 microM, without any inhibitory effect on the substance P release induced by capsaicin, potassium or bradykinin from cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
These data suggest that olopatadine may therefore be involved in the bradykinin-induced sensitization of the transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 in cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Contribution of sensory neurons to sex difference in the development of stress-induced gastric mucosal injury in mice.
Sensory neurons play a critical role in reducing stress-induced gastric mucosal injury by releasing calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) through an increase in gastric mucosal levels of prostacyclin (PGI(2)).
Because estrogen enhances nerve growth factor-mediated CGRP production in sensory neurons, we hypothesized that stress-induced gastric mucosal injury occurs less in females than in males.
Levels of CGRP messenger RNA in dorsal root ganglion neurons isolated from female CGRP(+/+) mice were decreased by ovariectomy, and these decreases were reversed by estradiol replacement.
Estrogen-mediated increases in CGRP levels in sensory neurons might contribute to reduce stress-induced gastric mucosal injury by attenuating inflammatory responses.
We examined whether these venoms also contain toxins that activate (rather than inhibit) excitatory channels on somatosensory neurons to produce a noxious sensation in mammals.
Here we show that venom from a tarantula that is native to the West Indies contains three inhibitor cysteine knot (ICK) peptides that target the capsaicin receptor (TRPV1), an excitatory channel expressed by sensory neurons of the pain pathway.
Critical evaluation of the colocalization between calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P, transient receptor potential vanilloid subfamily type 1 immunoreactivities, and isolectin B4 binding in primary afferent neurons of the rat and mouse.
These findings illustrate that there is a substantial overlap ( approximately 45% in the DRG and approximately 30% in the TG) between peptidergic neurons (ie, CGRP- and SP-expressing) and neurons that bind IB(4) in rat sensory ganglia.
For instance, in the DRG, significantly more CGRP-immunoreactive neurons also expressed IB(4) binding sites (44.5%) compared with the TG (27.5%).
In contrast, significantly fewer CGRP-immunoreactive neurons in the DRG colocalized TRPV1 immunoreactivity (49.2%) compared with the TG (70%).
Thus, whereas only an approximately 10% overlap was observed in TG neurons of mouse, significantly greater overlap (approximately 35%) was observed in those of rat.
Taken together, the present findings dictate prudence when extrapolating experimental conclusions about the neurochemical classification of neurons between sensory ganglia or between species, including humans.
Previously, we have reported that apoptosis of cerebellar granular neurons induced by incubation in 5 mm K(+) and serum-free medium (LK-S) was associated with an increase in the delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(K)).
Here, we show that I(K) associated with apoptotic neurons is mainly encoded by a Kv2.1 subunit.
Silencing Kv2.1 expression by small interfering RNA reduces I(K) and increases neuron viability.
Forskolin is able to decrease the I(K) amplitude recording from neurons of both the LK-S and control group, and prevents apoptosis of granule cells that are induced by LK-S.
Dibutyryl cAMP mimicks the effect of forskolin on the modulation of I(K) and, accordingly, the inhibitor of protein kinase A, H-89, aborts the neuron-protective effect induced by forskolin.
Quantitative RT-PCR and whole-cell recording revealed that the expression of Kv2.1 was elevated in the apoptotic neurons, and forskolin significantly depressed the expression of Kv2.1.
The most clearly described roles are in the regulation of growth cone turning in neurons.
In the present study, we examined the potent N-type VGCC antagonist omega-conotoxin CVID and non-selective N- and P/Q-type antagonist CVIB for their ability to block native VGCCs in rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and recombinant VGCCs expressed in Xenopus oocytes.
Omega-conotoxins CVID and CVIB inhibited depolarization-activated whole-cell VGCC currents in DRG neurons with pIC50 values of 8.12 +/- 0.05 and 7.64 +/- 0.08, respectively.
Inhibition of Ba2+ currents in DRG neurons by CVID (approximately 66% of total) appeared to be irreversible for > 30 min washout, whereas Ba2+ currents exhibited rapid recovery from block by CVIB (> or = 80% within 3 min).
Omega-conotoxins CVIB and CVID may be useful as antagonists of N- and P/Q-type VGCCs, particularly in sensory neurons involved in processing primary nociceptive information.
New genetically engineered mice provide additional insights to cellular mechanisms underlying seizure generation (BK calcium-activated potassium channels and interneuron-expressed sodium channels), genetic interactions that exacerbate seizure phenotype (Scn2a, Kcnq2 and background) and neurodevelopmental influences (Dlx transcription factors).
830 nm laser irradiation induces varicosity formation, reduces mitochondrial membrane potential and blocks fast axonal flow in small and medium diameter rat dorsal root ganglion neurons: implications for the analgesic effects of 830 nm laser.
We report the formation of 830 nm (cw) laser-induced, reversible axonal varicosities, using immunostaining with beta-tubulin, in small and medium diameter, TRPV-1 positive, cultured rat DRG neurons.
In cell bodies of the neuron, the decrease in MMP was also statistically significant (p<0.05), but the decrease occurred more slowly.
Control neurons in parallel cultures remained unaffected with no varicosity formation and no change in MMP.
In neurons, this results in a decrease in MMP with a concurrent decrease in available ATP required for nerve function, including maintenance of microtubules and molecular motors, dyneins and kinesins, responsible for fast axonal flow.
Kv2 subunits underlie slowly inactivating potassium current in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons.
We determined the expression of Kv2 channel subunits in rat somatosensory and motor cortex and tested for the contributions of Kv2 subunits to slowly inactivating K+ currents in supragranular pyramidal neurons.
The Kv2.1 antibody specifically blocked the slowly inactivating K+ current by 25-50% (at 8 min), demonstrating that Kv2.1 subunits underlie much of this current in neocortical pyramidal neurons.
Here, we show that cadherin-8 (cad8), a type-II classic cadherin, is important for cold sensation, whose circuitry is established by projection of sensory neurons into the spinal cord.
Cad8 was expressed by a subset of neurons in the dorsal horn (DH) of the spinal cord, as well as by a small number of neurons in the dorsal root ganglia (DRGs), and the majority of cad8-positive DRG neurons coexpressed cold temperature/menthol receptor (TRPM8).
LacZ/cad8-expressing sensory neurons and DH neurons were connected together, and cad8 protein was localized around the synaptic junctions formed between them.
We performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from DH neurons in spinal cord slices, in combination with menthol stimulation as a tool to excite central terminals of primary afferents expressing TRPM8.
LacZ-expressing DH neurons exhibited fast and slow miniature EPSCs.
These results demonstrate that cad8 is essential for establishing the physiological coupling between cold-sensitive sensory neurons and their target DH neurons.
Bradykinin-induced nuclear factor of activated T-cells-dependent transcription in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Bradykinin produced at sites of tissue injury and inflammation elicits acute pain and alters the sensitivity of nociceptive neurons to subsequent stimuli.
Bradykinin activation of B2 receptors evoked concentration-dependent (EC50 = 6.0 +/- 0.3 nM) increases in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) in a proportion of dorsal root ganglion neurons in primary culture.
In neurons expressing a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-NFAT4 fusion protein, a 2-min exposure to bradykinin induced the translocation of GFP-NFAT4 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) exerts prominent effects on hippocampal neurons, but the mechanisms that initiate its actions are poorly understood.
We report here that BDNF evokes a slowly developing and sustained nonselective cationic current (I(BDNF)) in CA1 pyramidal neurons.
This result shows how AQP9 in the gerbil hippocampus changes in neurons and is expressed in astrocytes before and after delayed neuronal death, respectively, after ischemia.
At neuromuscular synapses, the neural factor agrin released from motor neuron terminals stimulates postsynaptic specialization by way of the muscle specific kinase MuSK.
Contribution of calcium channel subtypes to the intracellular calcium signal in sensory neurons: the effect of injury.
Although the activation-induced intracellular Ca signal is disrupted by sensory neuron injury, the contribution of specific Ca channel subtypes is unknown.
Transients in dissociated rat dorsal root ganglion neurons were recorded using fura-2 microfluorometry.
Neurons from control rats and from neuropathic animals after spinal nerve ligation were activated either by elevated bath K or by field stimulation.
Significant contributions to the Ca transient are attributable to the N-, P/Q-, and R-type channels, especially in small neurons.
After injury, transients lost sensitivity to N-type and R-type blockers in axotomized small neurons, whereas adjacent small neurons showed decreased responses to blockers of R-type channels.
Axotomized large neurons were less sensitive to blockade of N- and P/Q-type channels.
After injury, neurons adjacent to axotomy show decreased sensitivity of K-induced transients to L-type blockade but increased sensitivity during field stimulation.
All high-voltage-activated Ca current subtypes contribute to Ca transients in sensory neurons, although the L-type channel contributes predominantly during prolonged activation.
Because this effect is cell-size specific, selective therapies might potentially be devised to differentially alter excitability of nociceptive and low-threshold sensory neurons.
After SCI, the HPA axis becomes activated and descending input to sympathetic preganglionic neurons (SPNs) is impaired.
Neurons of the preBtzinger complex (preBtC) form local excitatory networks and synchronously discharge bursts of action potentials during the inspiratory phase of respiratory network activity.
Hypothesizing that the phosphoinositides maintaining TRPM4 and TRPM5 channel sensitivity to Ca(2+) may similarly influence I(CAN) and thus regulate inspiratory drive potentials, we manipulated intracellular phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) and measured its effect on preBtC neurons in the context of ongoing respiratory-related rhythms in slice preparations.
Xenopus laevis growth cones from 4-8-h cultured neurons are attracted to BMP7 gradients but become repelled by BMP7 after overnight culture.
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) increases IGF-I production in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that stimulation of sensory neurons might increase the production of IGF-I in SHR.
Levels of CGRP and IGF-I in plasma, kidneys and heart in WKY and SHR and cellular cyclic AMP levels in dorsal root ganglion neurons (DRGs) isolated from WKY and SHR were measured by an ELISA-based method.
Sensory neuron activation might be lower in SHR than in WKY probably due to decreased production of cAMP in sensory neurons, explaining why IGF-I levels in plasma and tissues are lower in SHR than in WKY.
After skin-scratching stimulation, immunoreactivity of SP both in the peripheral nerve fibres and in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons was significantly decreased and was well-correlated with suppression of self-scratching behaviour.
From these findings, it is suggested that the induction of unresponsive states of self-scratching behaviour may be at least in part caused by the depleted states of SP in peripheral nerve fibres and/or in DRG neurons.
Micro-conotoxin KIIIA is representative of micro-conopeptides previously characterized as inhibitors of tetrodotoxin (TTX)-resistant sodium channels in amphibian dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Surprisingly, KIIIA was found to block most (>80%) of the TTX-sensitive, but only approximately 20% of the TTX-resistant, sodium current in mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (PNH) is characterized by muscle overactivity due to spontaneous discharges of lower motor neurons usually associated with antibodies against voltage-gated potassium channels.
We used adult mouse dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons as a model to study the role of p75(NTR) in RV infection of primary neurons.
We show that RV infects around 20% of DRG neurons, of which more than 80% are p75(NTR) positive, have large diameters, and are capsaicin insensitive.
Surprisingly, RV binding and infection are absent in about half of the p75(NTR)-expressing DRG neurons which have small diameters and are often capsaicin sensitive.
This indicates that p75(NTR) is not sufficient to mediate RV interaction in sensory neurons.
We conclude that although p75(NTR) is a receptor for soluble RVG in transfected cells of heterologous expression systems, an RVG-p75(NTR) interaction is not necessary for RV infection of primary neurons.
RGS2 modulates coupling between GABAB receptors and GIRK channels in dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area.
Agonists of GABA(B) receptors exert a bi-directional effect on the activity of dopamine (DA) neurons of the ventral tegmental area, which can be explained by the fact that coupling between GABA(B) receptors and G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) channels is significantly weaker in DA neurons than in GABA neurons.
Thus, low concentrations of agonists preferentially inhibit GABA neurons and thereby disinhibit DA neurons.
Here we show that, in DA neurons of mice, the low coupling efficiency reflects the selective expression of heteromeric GIRK2/3 channels and is dynamically modulated by a member of the regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) protein family.
Synaptic potentials in pyramidal neurons in the piriform cortex from olfactory-discrimination-trained rats have enhanced rise time 3 days after learning, and their dendritic spines are significantly smaller at this time.
The SK channels inhibitor, apamin, that selectively blocks the SK channels-mediated potassium currents enhanced the width of the PSP in neurons from trained rats only.
The effect of membrane electrical activity on spiral ganglion neuron (SGN) neurite growth remains unknown despite its relevance to cochlear implant technology.
Immunocytochemical studies indicate that Ca(v)1.2 channels are localized mainly in the soma and proximal dendrites of hippocampal pyramidal neurons, but electrophysiological data suggest a broader distribution of these channels.
The TRPV1 receptor is associated with preferential stress in large dorsal root ganglion neurons in early diabetic sensory neuropathy.
Recently, we reported increased expression and function of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) in large dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons in diabetic sensory neuropathy.
In this study, we examined the effects of TRPV1 activation on cell injury pathways in this subpopulation of neurons in the streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat model.
Large DRG neurons from diabetic (6-8 weeks) rats displayed increased oxidative stress and activation of cell injury markers compared with healthy controls.
Capsaicin (CAP) treatment induced decreased labeling of MitoTracker Red and increased cytosolic cytochrome c and activation of caspase 3 in large neurons isolated from diabetic rats.
CAP treatment also induced oxidative stress in large diabetic DRG neurons, which was blocked by pre-treatment with caspase or calpain inhibitor.
In addition, both mu-calpain expression and calpain activity were significantly increased in DRG neurons from diabetic rats after CAP treatment.
Treatment with capsazepine, a competitive TRPV1 antagonist, markedly reduced these abnormalities in vitro and prevented activation of cell injury in large DRG neurons in diabetic rats in vivo.
These results suggest that activation of the TRPV1 receptor activates pathways associated with caspase-dependent and calpain-dependent stress in large DRG neurons in STZ-diabetic rats.
Activation of the TRPV1 receptor may contribute to preferential neuronal stress in large DRG neurons relatively early in diabetic sensory neuropathy.
Constitutively active TRPC3 channels regulate basal ganglia output neurons.
A hallmark of the GABA projection neurons of the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), a key basal ganglia output nucleus, is its depolarized membrane potential and rapid spontaneous spikes that encode the basal ganglia output.
Parkinsonian movement disorders are often associated with abnormalities in SNr GABA neuron firing intensity and/or pattern.
A fundamental question remains regarding the molecular identity of the ion channels that drive these neurons to a depolarized membrane potential.
We show here that SNr GABA projection neurons selectively express type 3 canonical transient receptor potential (TRPC3) channels.
These channels are tonically active and mediate an inward, Na+-dependent current, leading to a substantial depolarization in these neurons.
These data demonstrate that TRPC3 channels play important roles in ensuring the appropriate firing intensity and pattern in SNr GABA projection neurons that are crucial to movement control.
Recovery studies showed that physiologic sensory function could return as early as two weeks post-RTX treatment, however, immunohistochemical examination of the DRG revealed a partial, but significant reduction in the number of the TRPV1-positive neurons.
The observations indicate that cardiac noxious neural afferent drive is responsible for the up-regulation of N/OFQ in the primary afferent neurons and intrinsic spinal neurons.
In the inspiratory neurons, we observed rhythmic activation of non-selective channels which had a conductance of 24 pS.
Calcium imaging of functional slices revealed rhythmic transients in small clusters of neurons present in a network.
Simulations of activity of neurons communicated via dendritic calcium waves showed emerging activity within neuronal clusters and its synchronization between the clusters.
Activation of CB1 specifically located on GABAergic interneurons inhibits LTD in the lateral amygdala.
Interestingly, WIN55,212-2 effects on LTD were abolished in CB1 knock-out mice (CB1-KO), and in conditional mutants lacking CB1 expression only in GABAergic interneurons, but were still present in mutants lacking CB1 in principal forebrain neurons.
Our data demonstrate that activation of CB1 specifically located on GABAergic interneurons inhibits LTD in the LA.
These findings suggest that CB1 expressed on either glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons play a differential role in the control of synaptic transmission and plasticity.
Calcium-independent activation of endocannabinoid/endovanilloid lipid signalling in sensory neurons by protein kinases C and A and thrombin.
In neurons of the rat dorsal root ganglia (DRG), TRPV1 is activated and/or sensitised by AEA as well as upon activation of protein kinases C (PKC) and A (PKA).
We investigated here the effect on AEA levels of PKC and PKA activators in DRG neurons.
Since AEA activates TRPV1, these findings may suggest the existence of an amplificatory cascades on this receptor in sensory neurons.
The lesions induced more than 90% loss of choline acetyltransferase-positive neurons in the NBM vs. only 28% in the medial septum.
These results show that disruption of sustained visual attention functions by damage to the NBM cholinergic neurons can be evidenced despite weak or no effects on variables accounting for motivational, locomotion- or impulsivity-related biases.
Group I metabotropic glutamate receptor-mediated gene expression in striatal neurons.
Group I mGluRs (mGluR1/5) are G-protein-coupled receptors and are abundantly expressed in most of medium spiny projection neurons in the striatum.
Recent evidence demonstrates that group I mGluRs are among essential regulators for constitutive and inducible gene expression in host neurons.
K+ channels at the axon initial segment dampen near-threshold excitability of neocortical fast-spiking GABAergic interneurons.
Fast-spiking cells (FS cells) are a prominent subtype of neocortical GABAergic interneurons with important functional roles.
The afferent neurons innervating the oesophagus originate from two embryonic sources: neurons located in vagal nodose ganglia originate from embryonic placodes and neurons located in vagal jugular and spinal dorsal root ganglia (DRG) originate from the neural crest.
Whole cell patch clamp recordings (35 degrees C) were made from the primary afferent neurons retrogradely labelled from the oesophagus.
5-Hydroxytryptamine (10 micromol L(-1)) activated vagal nodose C-fibres (70%) in the oesophagus but failed to activate overtly vagal jugular nerve fibres and oesophagus-specific spinal DRG neurons.
In patch clamp studies, 2-methyl-5-HT (10 micromol L(-1)) activated a proportion of isolated oesophagus-specific nodose capsaicin-sensitive neurons (putative cell bodies of nodose C-fibres).
Dendritic A-type potassium channel subunit expression in CA1 hippocampal interneurons.
BAPs have been well studied in a variety of neurons, and have been recently described in hippocampal and cortical interneurons, a heterogeneous population of GABAergic inhibitory cells that regulate activity of principal cells and neuronal networks.
We used well-characterized mouse monoclonal antibodies against the Kv4.3 and potassium channel interacting protein (KChIP) 1 subunits of A-type Kv channels, and antibodies against different interneuron markers in single- and double-label immunohistochemistry experiments to analyze the expression patterns of Kv4.3 and KChIP1 in hippocampal Ammon's horn (CA1) neurons.
Our results show that Kv4.3 and KChIP1 component subunits of A-type channels are co-localized in the soma and dendrites of a large number of GABAergic hippocampal interneurons.
These subunits co-localize extensively but not completely with markers defining the four major interneuron subpopulations tested (parvalbumin, calbindin, calretinin, and somatostatin).
These results suggest that CA1 hippocampal interneurons can be divided in two groups according to the expression of Kv4.3/KChIP1 channel subunits.
Antibodies against Kv4.3 and KChIP1 represent an important new tool for identifying a subpopulation of hippocampal interneurons with a unique dendritic A-type channel complement and ability to control BAPs.
Characterization of primary sensory neurons mediating static and dynamic allodynia in rat chronic constriction injury model.
The aim of this study is to characterize primary sensory neurons mediating the mechanical allodynia in a rat chronic constriction injury (CCI) model with a combination of pharmacological and histological investigations.
Immunohistochemical studies of TRPV1 and NF200, an A-fibre marker 200 kDa neurofilament, in dorsal root ganglion neurons demonstrated that each 48% of the positive-stained neurons were immunoreactive only for TRPV1 or NF200.
The other 4% of stained neurons were double-positive for TRPV1 and NF200.
Of the TRPV1positive neurons, more than 99% were small-(diameter <25 microm) and medium-(25-45 microm) sized.
In contrast, 97% of NF200 single-labelled neurons were medium-and large-(>45 microm) sized.
These findings suggest that two types of mechanical allodynia are transmitted by different primary sensory neurons: static allodynia is mediated by TRPV1 positive small-and medium-sized neurons and dynamic allodynia might be signalled by TRPV1-negative medium- and large-sized neurons.
Focus on "Dorsal Root Ganglion Neurons Innervating Skeletal Muscle Respond to Physiological Combinations of Protons, ATP, and Lactate Mediated by ASIC, P2X, and TRPV1".
Excitatory effects of low-level lead exposure on action potential firing of pyramidal neurons in CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices.
In the present study, the excitatory effects of low-level lead exposure on action potential (AP) firing of pyramidal neurons in CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices and the pathway through which lead induced these effects were studied with conventional whole-cell recording.
Five micromolar lead could not change the excitability of pyramidal neurons when slices were perfused with calcium-free ACSF.
These results provide evidence for excitatory neurotoxicity of low-level lead exposure, contribution of T-type VDCC in the entrance of lead into neurons, and a possible involvement of calcium flux alteration during APs in this excitatory neurotoxicity.
Effects of lingual nerve and chewing cortex stimulation upon activity of the swallowing neurons located in the region of the hypoglossal motor nucleus.
This study focuses on motoneurons and interneurons in the region of the hypoglossal nucleus (XIIth) related to swallowing and chewing.
In sheep anesthetized with halothane, we have used extracellular microelectrodes to study the effects of stimulation of the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN), the lingual nerve (LN) and the chewing cortex (CCx) upon activities of the swallowing neurons (SNs).
Ipsilateral stimulation (1-5 pulses at 500 Hz) of the peripheral afferents or CCx did not generally induce a short latency activation of the hypoglossal swallowing motoneurons (Group I SNs) since only 4 motoneurons (69 tested) were activated by the SLN, 4 motoneurons (56 tested) by the LN and none by the CCx.
In contrast, the same stimulations were more effective with swallowing interneurons (Group II SNs) located in the reticular formation close to the XIIth motor nucleus since 12 neurons (30 tested) were activated with short latencies (9 +/- 1.8 ms; mean latency +/- S.D.) by the SLN, 9 neurons (21 tested) by the LN (latency; 8 +/- 1.8 ms) and 5 neurons (18 tested) by the CCx (latency: 13 +/- 1.7 ms).
Seven neurons were activated by two or three modes of stimulation indicating the existence of convergent inputs upon some Group II SNs.
Moreover, 3 motoneurons and 4 interneurons inactive during swallowing discharged during chewing movements.(ABSTRACT
Phosphorylation of TRPV1 by neurokinin-1 receptor agonist exaggerates the capsaicin-mediated substance P release from cultured rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Immunocytochemistry study demonstrated that the NK-1R and TRPV1 were mainly co-expressed in the small-sized neurons.
These findings suggest that the activation of NK-1R by its agonist, by sensitizing the TRPV1 through the PKC phosphorylation of TRPV1, may play a role in the enhancement of the capsaicin-evoked SP release from cultured rat DRG neurons.
FGF14 regulates the intrinsic excitability of cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
We tested the hypothesis that loss of FGF14 affects the firing properties of Purkinje neurons, which play an important role in motor control and coordination.
Current clamp recordings from Purkinje neurons in cerebellar slices revealed attenuated spontaneous firing in Fgf14(-/-) neurons.
Unlike in the wild type animals, more than 80% of Fgf14(-/-) Purkinje neurons were quiescent and failed to fire repetitively in response to depolarizing current injections.
Immunohistochemical examination revealed reduced expression of Nav1.6 protein in Fgf14(-/-) Purkinje neurons.
Together, these observations suggest that FGF14 is required for normal Nav1.6 expression in Purkinje neurons, and that the loss of FGF14 impairs spontaneous and repetitive firing in Purkinje neurons by altering the expression of Nav1.6 channels.
Regional distribution of calcium elevation during sensory transduction in spider mechanoreceptor neurons.
Spider mechanosensory VS-3 neurons receive peripheral efferent synaptic modulation, with regional variations in the types of efferent synapses and transmitter receptors.
The roles of calcium in these neurons are not completely understood, but could include modulation of both mechanosensitivity and response dynamics.
We conclude that mechanically stimulated action potentials start near sensory dendrite tips and pass rapidly through the neurons to the axons, activating low voltage activated calcium channels in all three regions and causing calcium concentration to rise rapidly in each region.
In addition, SSTR5 immunoreactivity was reduced in CA2 pyramidal cells and various interneurons.
Both SSTR2B and SSTR4 immunoreactivities were increased within microglia following SE. Our findings suggest that increases in neuron-glial SSTR expressions may be closely related to the enhanced inhibition of the dentate gyrus and regulation of reactive microgliosis in the hippocampus of a pilocarpine model of temporal lobe epilepsy.
Seletracetam (ucb 44212) inhibits high-voltage-activated Ca2+ currents and intracellular Ca2+ increase in rat cortical neurons in vitro.
Combined electrophysiologic and microfluorometric recordings were performed from layer V pyramidal neurons in rat cortical slices to study the effects of SEL on the paroxysmal depolarization shifts (PDSs), and the simultaneous elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) concentration [Ca(2+)](i).
Moreover, the involvement of high-voltage activated Ca(2+) currents (HVACCs) was investigated by means of patch-clamp recordings from acutely dissociated pyramidal neurons.
Furthermore, SEL significantly reduced HVACCs in pyramidal neurons.
In the past, ciliated receptor neurons, basal cells, and supporting cells were considered the principal components of the main olfactory epithelium.
We asked whether the TrpM5-positive cells in the olfactory epithelium are microvillous and whether they belong to a chemosensory system, i.e. are olfactory neurons or trigeminally-innervated solitary chemosensory cells.
Immunocytochemical analyses of pyramidal-like neurons isolated from amygdala revealed that somas with relatively large size were highly immunoreactive to both anti-androgen receptor (AR) and anti-BK channel antibodies, while those with smaller size were not.
The double-immunopositive neurons were dominant (60%) among pyramidal-like neurons isolated from amygdala of male rats but rare among those from female.
The membrane current sensitive to penitrem A, a BK channel blocker, was the major K(+) current component in large neurons and showed higher current-density than that in smaller ones.
Here, recent findings pertaining to TRPV4's mechano- and osmosensory function in endothelia, in the alveolar unit of the lung, and in intestinal sensory innervation are reviewed, namely, transduction of mechanical shear stress in endothelia, maintenance of alveolar integrity on the endothelial side, and intestinal mechanosensation of noxious stimuli by dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons, which can be potently sensitized to mechanical stimuli by activation of the proteinase-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2), in a strictly TRPV4-dependent manner.
To identify spinal neurons responding to noxious stimulus to the skeletal muscle, 10% acetic acids were injected into the gastrocnemius and erector spinae muscles and expression of phospho extracellular signal-regulated kinase (pERK) in spinal cords were identified with immunohistochemical method.
TRPV1-positive primary afferents were contacted with spinal neurons expressing pERK after injection of acetic acid into the muscles.
Voltage gated calcium channels (VGCCs) are well established mediators of pain signals in primary afferent neurons.
The contribution of N-type channels to the processing of pain signals is regulated by alternate splicing of the N-type channel gene, with unique N-type channel splice variants being expressed in small nociceptive neurons.
Over-expression of Munc18 in dorsal root ganglion neurons did not affect CaV2.2 current amplitude or fast kinetics but siRNA-knockdown resulted in a negative shift in the steady state inactivation curve, an effect attributed to an indirect action via syntaxin 1.
Here, we examined the putative novel contribution of the dipeptidyl-peptidase-like protein-6 DPP6-S to the gamma of native [cerebellar granule neuron (CGN)] and reconstituted Kv4.2 channels.
Ether--go-go-related gene K+ channels contribute to threshold excitability of mouse auditory brainstem neurons.
The ionic basis of excitability requires identification and characterisation of expressed channels and their specific roles in native neurons.
We have exploited principal neurons of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) as a model system for examining voltage-gated K(+) channels, because of their known function and simple morphology.
Quantitative RT-PCR showed that ERG1 and ERG3 were the predominant mRNAs and immunohistochemistry showed expression as somatic plasma membrane puncta on principal neurons.
Findings from recent reports demonstrate that chronic ethanol produces a reduction in the function of SK channels in VTA dopaminergic and CA1 pyramidal neurons.
It is hypothesized that the reduction in SK channel function increases the propensity for burst firing in VTA neurons and increases the likelihood for aberrant hyperexcitability during ethanol withdrawal in hippocampus.
Reactive oxygen species mediate TNFR1 increase after TRPV1 activation in mouse DRG neurons.
The present study investigated TNFR1 receptors in primary cultured mouse dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons after TRPV1 activation and the involvement of ROS.
The results demonstrate that TRPV1 activation increases TNFR1 receptors and ROS generation in primary cultures of mouse DRG neurons.
TRPV1 activation increases TNFR1 in cultured mouse DRG neurons through a ROS signaling pathway, a novel sensitization mechanism in DRG neurons.
Substance MCS-18 isolated from Helleborus purpurascens is a potent antagonist of the capsaicin receptor, TRPV1, in rat cultured sensory neurons.
We report that the pure natural product MCS-18 isolated from this source is a potent, specific and reversible antagonist of the capsaicin receptor, TRPV1, expressed in rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons.
MCS-18 inhibited the increase in intracellular calcium concentration evoked in DRG neurons by capsaicin (300 nM) and low pH (5.5) but not by heat (43 degrees C).
Axotomy depletes intracellular calcium stores in primary sensory neurons.
Previous investigations have revealed disrupted Ca signaling in primary sensory neurons after injury.
Intracellular Ca levels were measured with Fura-2 or mag-Fura-2 microfluorometry in axotomized fifth lumbar (L5) dorsal root ganglion neurons and adjacent L4 neurons isolated from hyperalgesic rats after L5 spinal nerve ligation, compared to neurons from control animals.
Endoplasmic reticulum Ca stores released by the ryanodine-receptor agonist caffeine decreased by 46% in axotomized small neurons.
In contrast to control neurons, Ca stores in axotomized neurons were not expanded by neuronal activation by K depolarization, and the proportionate rate of refilling by sarco-endoplasmic Ca-ATPase was normal.
Luminal Ca concentration was also reduced by 38% in axotomized neurons in permeabilized neurons.
The adjacent neurons of the L4 dorsal root ganglia showed modest and inconsistent changes after L5 spinal nerve ligation.
The distal end of the axon initial segment (AIS) is the preferred site for action potential initiation in cortical pyramidal neurons because of its high Na(+) channel density.
Patch-clamp recording from the axon cut end of pyramidal neurons in the rat prefrontal cortex revealed a high density of Na(+) current and a progressive reduction in the half-activation voltage (up to 14 mV) with increasing distance from the soma at the AIS.
NMDA receptor subunit expression and PAR2 receptor activation in colospinal afferent neurons (CANs) during inflammation induced visceral hypersensitivity.
Previously we demonstrated that a unique set of enteric neurons, colospinal afferent neurons (CANs), co-localize with the NR1 and NR2D subunits of the NMDA receptor as well as with the PAR2 receptor.
Recently, work has suggested that dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons expressing the transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) receptor mediate inflammation induced visceral hypersensitivity.
Therefore, in order to study CAN involvement in visceral hypersensitivity, DRG neurons expressing the TRPV1 receptor were lesioned with resiniferatoxin (RTX) prior to inflammation and behavioural testing.
RTX treatment resulted in a significant decrease in TRPV1 expressing neurons in the colon and immunohistochemical analysis revealed no change in peptide or receptor expression in CANs following RTX lesioning as compared to control data.
These compounds exhibited potent 45Ca2+ uptake inhibition in rat DRG neuron via TRPV1 blockade.
A comparison of the effect of calcium channel ligands and GABAB agonists and antagonists on transmitter release and somatic calcium channel currents in cultured neurons.
Glutamate release has been examined from cultured cerebellar granule neurons in the rat using the technique of prelabelling the releasable pool of glutamate with [3H]glutamine.
Glutamate release was stimulated in control neurons by 2-min incubation with 50 mM K+, or in neurons continuously depolarized in Ca2(+)-free 50 mM K+ medium, by 2-min incubation with medium containing 5 mM Ca2+.
The antagonist enantiomer (-)-202-791 produced a small inhibition of K(+)-stimulated release, whereas (-)-202-791 completely inhibited Ca2(+)-stimulated release from depolarized neurons at concentrations greater than 10 nM. (-)-Baclofen (100 microM) inhibited transmitter release similarly (25-30%) under the two conditions.
Calcium-channel currents were recorded from cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons under control conditions at a holding potential of -80 mV, or in neurons depolarized to -30 mV.
Acute action of rotenone on nigral dopaminergic neurons--involvement of reactive oxygen species and disruption of Ca2+ homeostasis.
Rotenone is a toxin used to generate animal models of Parkinson's disease; however, the mechanisms of toxicity in substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) neurons have not been well characterized.
We have investigated rotenone (0.05-1 microm) effects on SNc neurons in acute rat midbrain slices, using whole-cell patch-clamp recording combined with microfluorometry.
This correlation was not seen in non-dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr).
Our results show that mitochondrial ROS production is a key element in the effect of rotenone on ATP-gated K(+) channels and TRPM2-like channels in SNc neurons, and demonstrate, in these neurons (but not in the SNr), a large potentiation of rotenone-induced [Ca(2+)](i) rise by a small increase in baseline [Ca(2+)](i).
Burst discharges in neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus are shaped by calcium-induced calcium release.
The nucleus reticularis thalami (NRT) is a layer of inhibitory neurons that surrounds the dorsal thalamus.
Neurons of the NRT exhibit a transient depolarization termed low threshold spike (LTS) following sustained hyperpolarization.
A signalling triad consisting of the sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA), Ca2+ activated K+ channels (SK2), and LVACC is active in dendrites of NRT neurons and shapes rhythmic oscillations.
The aim of our study was to find out (i) if and how Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) via ryanodine receptors (RyR) can be evoked in NRT neurons and (ii) how the released Ca2+ affects burst activity.
Combining electrophysiological, immunohistochemical, and two-photon Ca2+ imaging techniques, we show that CICR in NRT neurons takes place by a cell-type specific coupling of LVACC and RyR.
While action potentials contributed little to the build-up of [Ca2+]i upon repetitive LTS generation, the Ca2+ released via RyR significantly reduced the number of action potentials during an LTS and reduced the neurons' low threshold activity, thus potentially reducing hypersynchronicity.
We conclude that the activation of LVACC specifically causes CICR via RyR in neurons of the NRT, thereby adding a Ca2+-dependent intracellular route to the mechanisms determining rhythmic oscillatory bursting in this nucleus.
For Purkinje cell output to reach the rest of the brain it must be conveyed by neurons of the DCN or vestibular nuclei.
As Kcnc1, but not Kcnc3, alleles are lost, mutant mice exhibit increasing gait ataxia accompanied by spike broadening and deceleration in DCN neurons, suggesting the facet of coordination rescued by Purkinje-cell-restricted Kv3.3 restoration in mice lacking just Kcnc3 is hypermetria, while gait ataxia emerges when additionally Kcnc1 alleles are lost.
Thus, fast repolarization in Purkinje cells appears important for normal movement velocity, whereas DCN neurons are a prime candidate locus where fast repolarization is necessary for normal gait patterning.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that the spinal nerve injury changed the expression profiles of CK1epsilon protein in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and the spinal cord neurons.
Both the percentage of CK1epsilon-positive neurons and the expression level of CK1epsilon protein were increased in DRG and the spinal cord of the neuropathic mice.
Actions of bis(7)-tacrine and tacrine on transient potassium current in rat DRG neurons and potassium current mediated by K(V)4.2 expressed in Xenopus oocyte.
Actions of bis(7)-tacrine on ligand-gated ion channels and voltage-gated cation channels have been identified on neurons of both central and peripheral nervous systems.
In the present study, the effect of bis(7)-tacrine was investigated on the K(V)4.2 encoded potassium currents expressed in Xenopus oocytes and the transient A-type potassium current (I(K(A))) on rat DRG neurons.
The transient receptor potential channel melastatin member 8 (TRPM8) is expressed in sensory neurons, where it constitutes the main receptor of environmental innocuous cold (10-25 degrees C).
Among several types of G protein-coupled receptors expressed in sensory neurons, G(i)-coupled alpha 2A-adrenoreceptor (alpha 2A-AR), is known to be involved in thermoregulation; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood.
Here we demonstrated that stimulation of alpha 2A-AR inhibited TRPM8 in sensory neurons from rat dorsal root ganglia (DRG).
New neurons are added to the adult brain throughout life, but only half ultimately integrate into existing circuits.
Sensory experience is an important regulator of the selection of new neurons but it remains unknown whether experience provides specific patterns of synaptic input or simply a minimum level of overall membrane depolarization critical for integration.
To investigate this issue, we genetically modified intrinsic electrical properties of adult-generated neurons in the mammalian olfactory bulb.
First, we observed that suppressing levels of cell-intrinsic neuronal activity via expression of ESKir2.1 potassium channels decreases, whereas enhancing activity via expression of NaChBac sodium channels increases survival of new neurons.
Furthermore, even when neurons are induced to fire dramatically altered patterns of action potentials, increased levels of cell-intrinsic activity completely blocks cell death triggered by NMDA receptor deletion.
These findings demonstrate that overall levels of cell-intrinsic activity govern survival of new neurons and precise firing patterns are not essential for neuronal integration into existing brain circuits.
Homeostatic regulation of synaptic excitability: tonic GABA(A) receptor currents replace I(h) in cortical pyramidal neurons of HCN1 knock-out mice.
In cortical pyramidal neurons from wild-type mice, HCN1 channels underlie a dendritic hyperpolarization-activated cationic current (I(h)) that serves to limit temporal summation of synaptic inputs.
In HCN1 knock-out mice, as expected, I(h) is reduced in pyramidal neurons and its effects on synaptic summation are strongly diminished.
Strikingly, despite diminished I(h), baseline sublinear summation of evoked EPSPs was unchanged in pyramidal neurons from HCN1 knock-out mice; however, blocking tonic GABA(A) currents with bicuculline enhanced synaptic summation more strongly in pyramidal cells from HCN1 knock-out mice than in those cells from wild-type mice.
Increasing tonic GABA(A) receptor conductance in the context of reduced I(h), using computational or pharmacological approaches, restored normal baseline synaptic summation, as observed in neurons from HCN1 knock-out mice.
These data indicate that upregulation of alpha5 subunit-mediated GABA(A) receptor tonic current compensates quantitatively for loss of dendritic I(h) in cortical pyramidal neurons from HCN1 knock-out mice to maintain normal synaptic summation; they further imply that dendritosomatic synaptic efficacy is a controlled variable for homeostatic regulation of cortical neuron excitability in vivo.
The heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein-R is necessary for axonal beta-actin mRNA translocation in spinal motor neurons.
Axonal transport and translation of beta-actin mRNA plays an important role for axonal growth and presynaptic differentiation in many neurons including hippocampal, cortical and spinal motor neurons.
hnRNP-R has been found as an interaction partner of the survival motor neuron protein that is deficient in spinal muscular atrophy.
We studied the role of hnRNP-R in motor neurons by knockdown in zebrafish embryos and isolated mouse motor neurons.
Suppression of hnRNP-R in developing zebrafish embryos results in reduced axon growth in spinal motor neurons, without any alteration in motor neuron survival.
ShRNA-mediated knockdown in isolated embryonic mouse motor neurons reduces beta-actin mRNA translocation to the axonal growth cone, which is paralleled by reduced axon elongation.
Dendrite growth and neuronal survival were not affected by hnRNP-R depletion in these neurons.
The loss of beta-actin mRNA in axonal growth cones of hnRNP-R-depleted motor neurons resembles that observed in Smn-deficient motor neurons, a model for the human disease spinal muscular atrophy.
In particular, hnRNP-R-depleted motor neurons also exhibit defects in presynaptic clustering of voltage-gated calcium channels.
In response to histamine, serotonin and/or TRPV4 agonist (4alphaPDD), calcium signals and TRPV4 localisation studies were performed on dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons projecting from the colon.
Pre-exposure of DRG neurons projecting from the colon, to histamine or serotonin, increased Ca(2+) responses induced by 4alphaPDD by a protein kinase C (PKC), phospholipase Cbeta (PLCbeta), mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK) and phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2))-dependent mechanisms.
Serotonin and histamine sensitise TRPV4 response to 4alphaPDD both in vivo (increased visceral hypersensitivity) and in vitro, in sensory neurons, by a PKC, PLA(2), PLCbeta and MAPKK-dependent mechanism.
Serotonin and histamine caused a MAPKK-dependent increase in TRPV4 expression in colonic sensory neurons plasma membranes.
Further, histamine- or serotonin-mediated visceral hypersensitivity depend on TRPV4 expression in sensory neurons.
The acute nociceptive signals induced by bradykinin in rat sensory neurons are mediated by inhibition of M-type K+ channels and activation of Ca2+-activated Cl- channels.
Here we report that in small nociceptive neurons from rat dorsal root ganglia, BK, acting through its B2 receptors, PLC, and release of calcium from intracellular stores, robustly inhibits M-type K+ channels and opens Ca2+-activated Cl- channels (CaCCs) encoded by Tmem16a (also known as Ano1).
Summation of these two effects accounted for the depolarization and increase in AP firing induced by BK in DRG neurons.
Sensory neurons release calcitonin-gene related peptide (CGRP) on stimulation.
We have reported that topical application of capsaicin increases facial skin elasticity by increasing the production of dermal insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) through stimulation of sensory neurons in mice and humans.
GG increased CGRP release and cAMP levels in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons isolated from wild-type mice.
Pretreatment with capsazepine, an inhibitor of vanilloid receptor-1 activation, and with KT5720, an inhibitor of protein kinase A, reversed GG-induced increases in CGRP release from DRG neurons.
These observations strongly suggest that GG increases the production of IGF-I in the skin through sensory neuron stimulation, thereby increasing skin elasticity.
Effects of selective alpha 2-adrenoreceptor stimulation on capsaicin-evoked substance P release from primary cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Alpha2 adrenoreceptors are expressed in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons and may be involved in inflammation or other physiological and pathophysiological conditions.
To determine the effects of administration of selective alpha2 adrenoreceptor agonists or antagonists on substance P (SP) release from DRG neurons without or with capsaicin stimulation, primary cultured embryonic rat DRG neurons were preincubated with the selective alpha2 adrenoreceptor agonist clonidine (10(-5) mol/L) or the alpha2 adrenoreceptor antagonist yohimbine (10(-5) mol/L) for 4 days, respectively, followed by the addition of capsaicin (10(-7) nmol/L) for additional 10 min.
Cultures were examined by radioimmunoassay (RIA) for detecting SP levels released from DRG neurons before and after capsaicin stimulation.
The data provided in the present study suggest that adrenergic modulation on primary sensory neurons by an alpha2 adrenoreceptor agonist may contribute to the analgesic effects in neurogenic inflammation.
Activation of phosphatidylinositol-linked D1-like receptors increases spontaneous glutamate release in rat somatosensory cortical neurons in vitro.
In the present study the effects of SKF83959 on the spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs) were investigated through whole-cell recording from layer V-VI pyramidal neurons in rat somatosensory cortical slices.
To our knowledge, this is the first pharmacological evidence that PI-linked D(1)-like dopamine receptors do exist in presynaptic terminals of cortical neurons and play an important role in controlling the spontaneous glutamate release.
Current-clamp recordings were performed in rat DRG (dorsal root ganglia) neurons in order to assess the consequences of TRPV1 activation on neuronal excitability.
Current-clamp recordings confirmed that the rate of receptor activation translates in the ability of agonists to generate action potentials in sensory neurons.
We have demonstrated that the lipophilicity of the compounds is directly related to the kinetics of TRPV1 activation and that the latter influences their ability to trigger action potentials in sensory neurons and, ultimately, pungency.
Two distinct pools of large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels in the somatic plasma membrane of central principal neurons.
By applying SDS-digested freeze-fracture replica labeling (SDS-FRL) and postembedding immunogold electron microscopy, we have now studied the spatial organization of somatic BK(Ca) channels in neocortical layer 5 pyramidal neurons, principal neurons of the central and basolateral amygdaloid nuclei, hippocampal pyramidal neurons and dentate gyrus (DG) granule cells to establish whether there is a common organizational principle in the distribution of BK(Ca) channels in central principal neurons.
This study indicates a common organizational principle for somatic BK(Ca) channels in central principal neurons with the formation of a clustered and a scattered pool of channels, and a cell-type specific density of this channel type.
IL-6-enhanced capsaicin-evoked release of calcitonin gene-related peptide from cultured DRG neurons was blocked by TB-2-081.
TB-2-081 effectively reduces pancreatitis-induced pain through peripheral mechanisms that are likely due to (a) increased expression of IL-6 in the DRG and (b) IL-6-mediated sensitization of nociceptive neurons.
Here, we report that a specialized olfactory subsystem that includes olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) expressing the receptor guanylyl cyclase GC-D, the cyclic nucleotide-gated channel subunit CNGA3, and the carbonic anhydrase isoform CAII (GC-D(+) OSNs) is required for the acquisition of socially transmitted food preferences (STFPs) in mice.
We additionally investigated if pruritogen-evoked activity of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons is enhanced in this model.
Spontaneous scratching may reflect ongoing itch, and enhanced pruritogen-evoked scratching may represent hyperknesis (enhanced itch), both potentially due to sensitization of itch-signaling neurons.
TRPA1 mediates mechanical currents in the plasma membrane of mouse sensory neurons.
To determine the role of TRPA1 in the generation of mechanically-sensitive currents, we used dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron cultures from adult mice and applied rapid focal mechanical stimulation (indentation) to the soma membrane.
Small neurons (diameter <27 microm) were studied because TRPA1 is functionally present in these neurons which largely give rise to C-fiber afferents in vivo.
Small neurons were classified by isolectin B4 binding.
First, significantly more IB4 negative neurons (84%) responded to mechanical stimulation than IB4 positive neurons (54%).
Second, 89% of Slowly Adapting currents were present in IB4 negative neurons whereas only 11% were found in IB4 positive neurons.
Third, Slowly Adapting currents were completely absent in IB4 negative neurons from TRPA1-/- mice.
Consistent with this, Slowly Adapting currents were abolished in wild type IB4 negative neurons stimulated in the presence of a TRPA1 antagonist, HC-030031.
In addition, the amplitude of Transient mechanically-activated currents in IB4 positive neurons from TRPA1-/- mice was reduced by over 60% compared to TRPA1+/+ controls; however, a similar reduction did not occur in wild-type neurons treated with HC-030031.
parallel genetic and pharmacological data demonstrate that TRPA1 mediates the Slowly Adapting mechanically-activated currents in small-diameter IB4 negative neurons from adult mice.
The TRPA1 protein may also contribute to a complex that mediates Transient mechanically-activated currents in small IB4 positive C fiber type neurons.
Characterization of sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia of Bax-deficient mice.
During development, the rescue of spinal motoneurons as well as sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) from programmed cell death (PCD) depends on the integrity of peripheral target innervation.
Following deletion of the pro-apoptotic gene Bax, both motoneurons and DRG neurons are rescued from PCD.
In 1-month-old Bax-deficient (Bax-/-) mice, distinct subsets of DRG neurons that were immunopositive for TrkA, CGRP, TRPV1 or TrkC, were all increased in number and exhibited cell atrophy compared to wild type DRG neurons.
By contrast, the functional properties of populations of rescued thermoreceptor and mechanoreceptor DRG neurons were unchanged.
Inhibition of NF-kappaB prevents mechanical allodynia induced by spinal ventral root transection and suppresses the re-expression of Nav1.3 in DRG neurons in vivo and in vitro.
In the present work we tested if the activation of NF-B is required for re-expression of Nav1.3, which is important for development of neuropathic pain, in uninjured DRG neurons.
As our previous work has shown that up-regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-) in DRG is responsible for the re-expression of Nav1.3 in uninjured DRG neurons following L5 ventral root injury, we investigated whether activation of NF-B is essential for the up-regulation of Nav1.3 by TNF-.
Results showed that application of rat recombinant TNF- (rrTNF) into the cultured normal adult rat DRG neurons increased the immunoreactive (IR) of Nav1.3 localized mainly around the cell membrane and pre-treatment with PDTC blocked the change dose-dependently.
The data suggested that injury to ventral root might lead to neuropathic pain and the re-expression of Nav1.3 in primary sensory neurons by activation of NF-B.
Electrophysiological recordings made just before the lesion, immediately after the lesion, and 2 months after the lesion demonstrated that cortical areas just rostral to the lesioned area 5, and areas 1 and 2, were topographically reorganized and that receptive fields for neurons in these fields changed location on the body surface.
ASICs and TRPV1 are present in sensory neurons.
To understand the underlying mechanisms, we have analyzed ASIC and TRPV1 function in a recombinant expression system and in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons at room and physiological temperature.
The contribution of TRPV1 relative to ASICs to H(+)-gated currents in DRG neurons increases with higher temperature and acidity.
Still, ASICs remain the principal pH sensors of DRG neurons at 35C in the pH range 6.
These events might also impact central processes of primary sensory neurons, triggering in nociceptors a hyperexcitable state and spontaneous activity (SA) that drive behavioral hypersensitivity and pain.
We show that small DRG neurons from rats (Rattus norvegicus) receiving thoracic spinal injury 3 d to 8 months earlier and recorded 1 d after dissociation exhibit an elevated incidence of SA coupled with soma hyperexcitability compared with untreated and sham-treated groups.
SA incidence was greatest in lumbar DRG neurons (57%) and least in cervical neurons (28%), and failed to decline over 8 months.
Many sampled SA neurons were capsaicin sensitive and/or bound the nociceptive marker, isolectin B4.
Recordings from C- and A-fibers revealed SCI-induced SA generated in or near the somata of the neurons in vivo.
We studied the effect of xenon on capsaicin-evoked cobalt uptake in rat cultured primary sensory neurons and in human TRPV1 (hTRPV1)-expressing human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells.
Xenon (75%) reduced the number of primary sensory neurons responding to the TRPV1 agonist, capsaicin (100 nM-1 M) by ~25% to ~50%.
Xenon (80%) reduced by ~40% the number of phosphorylated ERK1/2-expressing neurons in rat spinal dorsal horn resulting from hind-paw capsaicin injection.
Electrical injury alters ion channel expression levels and electrophysiological properties in rabbit dorsal root ganglia neurons.
However, the changes of ion channels in neurons after electrical shocks have not been systematically investigated yet.
One week later, the expression levels and electrophysiological changes of voltage-gated potassium (Kv) and sodium (Nav) channels in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons were evaluated by RT-PCR, immunofluorescence staining and patch clamp technique.
Visual deprivation suppresses L5 pyramidal neuron excitability by preventing the induction of intrinsic plasticity.
Here we show that MD reduces the intrinsic excitability of layer 5 (L5) pyramidal neurons and enhances long-term potentiation of intrinsic excitability (LTP-IE).
Severely affected Clcn7(-/-) and gl mice have remarkably similar neuropathologic phenotypes, with pronounced reactive changes and neuron loss in the thalamocortical system, similar to findings in early-onset forms of NCL.
Here we show that Pirt does not alter the phosphoinositide sensitivity of TRPV1 in HEK-293 cells, that there is no FRET between TRPV1 and Pirt, and that dissociated dorsal root ganglion neurons from Pirt knock-out mice have an apparent affinity for PIP2 indistinguishable from that of their wild-type littermates.
Activation of ATP-sensitive potassium channels antagonize nociceptive behavior and hyperexcitability of DRG neurons from rats.
In this study, we describe the antagonistic effects of KATP activators pinacidil and diazoxide on nocifensive behavior induced by bradykinin (BK), thermo and mechanical stimuli, and the bradykinin-induced hyperexcitability of DRG neurons.
We also found that KATP activators can moderately activate KATP in DRG neurons.
This systematic study clearly demonstrates that activation of KATP could have significant modulatory effects on the excitability of sensory neurons and thus on sensory behaviors, such as nociception.
Pacemaker neurons within newborn spinal pain circuits.
Spontaneous activity driven by "pacemaker" neurons, defined by their intrinsic ability to generate rhythmic burst firing, contributes to the development of sensory circuits in many regions of the immature CNS.
However, it is unknown whether pacemaker-like neurons are present within central pain pathways in the neonate.
Here, we provide evidence that a subpopulation of glutamatergic interneurons within lamina I of the rat spinal cord exhibits oscillatory burst firing during early life, which occurs independently of fast synaptic transmission.
Pacemaker neurons were distinguished by a higher ratio of persistent, voltage-gated Na(+) conductance to leak membrane conductance (g(Na,P)/g(leak)) compared with adjacent, nonbursting lamina I neurons.
Bursting neurons received direct projections from high-threshold sensory afferents but transmitted nociceptive signals with poor fidelity while in the bursting mode.
The observation that pacemaker neurons send axon collaterals throughout the neonatal spinal cord raises the possibility that intrinsic burst firing could provide an endogenous drive to the developing sensorimotor networks that mediate spinal pain reflexes.
Ototrauma induces sodium channel plasticity in auditory afferent neurons.
Such damage often causes the dendrites of the spiral ganglion neurons (SGN), the neurons that provide the afferent innervation of the hair cells, to swell and degenerate thus damaging the synapse.
Glutathione modulates Ca(2+) influx and oxidative toxicity through TRPM2 channel in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.
GSH depletion has been implicated in the neurobiology of sensory neurons.
Because the mechanisms that lead to melastatin-like transient receptor potential 2 (TRPM2) channel activation/inhibition in response to glutathione depletion and 2-aminoethyldiphenyl borinate (2-APB) administration are not understood, we tested the effects of 2-APB and GSH on oxidative stress and buthionine sulfoximine (BSO)-induced TRPM2 cation channel currents in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons of rats.
DRG neurons were freshly isolated from rats and the neurons were incubated for 24h with BSO.
TRPM2 channels current densities and cytosolic free Ca(2+) content of the neurons were higher in BSO and H(2)O(2) groups than in control.
Glutathione peroxidase activity, lipid peroxidation and GSH levels in the DRG neurons were also modulated by GSH and 2-APB inhibition.
In conclusion, we observed the protective role of 2-APB and GSH on Ca(2+) influx through a TRPM2 channel in intracellular GSH depleted DRG neurons.
Since cytosolic glutathione depletion is a common feature of neuropathic pain and diseases of sensory neuron, our findings are relevant to the etiology of neuropathology in DRG neurons.
The distribution of KCNQ5 in neural retina suggests that these channels may function in the shaping of the photoresponses of cone and rod photoreceptors and the processing of visual information by retinal neurons.
Lateral habenular neurons projecting to reward-processing monoaminergic nuclei express hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotid-gated cation channels.
Major projections of LHb neurons target the dopaminergic ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the serotonergic dorsal (DR) and median raphe nuclei (MnR).
Glutamatergic LHb efferents terminate on GABAergic neurons in the VTA, the rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg), and the raphe nuclei, thereby suppressing monoamine release when required by the present behavioral context.
It is yet unknown whether this inhibition is the result of a continuous external activation by other brain areas, or if it is intrinsically generated by LHb projection neurons.
To analyze whether the tonic inhibition may be the result of a hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotid-gated cation channel (HCN)-mediated pacemaker activity of LHb projection neurons, we combined retrograde tracing in rats with in situ hybridization of HCN1 to HCN4 mRNAs.
In fact, close to all LHb neurons targeting VTA or raphe nuclei are equipped with HCN subunit mRNAs.
While HCN1 mRNA is scarce, most neurons display strong expression of HCN2 to HCN4 mRNAs, in line with the potential formation of heteromeric channels.
Thus, our data suggest that the tonic inhibition of monoamine release is intrinsically generated in LHb projection neurons and that their activity may only be modulated by synaptic inputs to the LHb.
Using Ca(2+) imaging and whole-cell patch-clamp methods, we analysed the response of TRP channels to three kinds of capsinoids, capsiate, dihydrocapsiate and nordihydrocapsiate, in HEK293T cells expressing TRP channels or in primary cultures of mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons generate an after-hyperpolarization (AHP) whose medium component is thought to be generated by small-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels (SK channels).
[Effects of gabapentin on high-voltage-activated calcium current in dorsal root ganglion neurons in rats].
To compare the effects of gabapentin on high-voltage-activated calcium (HVA) current in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons in normal and nerve-injured rats and understand the reasons of their differences.
L(5) (SNL-L(5) group) and L(4) DRGs (SNL-L(4) group) were respectively isolated and the ganglionic neurons enzymatically dissociated.
The lumbar DRG neurons of normal rats were treated similarly.
Gabapentin enhances the inhibition of HVA-Ca(2+) current in injured DRG neurons following spinal nerve ligation in rats.
Differential regulation of HCN channel isoform expression in thalamic neurons of epileptic and non-epileptic rat strains.
Here we combined electrophysiological, immunohistochemical, and mathematical modeling techniques to examine HCN gene expression and I(h) properties in thalamocortical relay (TC) neurons of the dorsal part of the lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN) in an epileptic (WAG/Rij) compared to a non-epileptic (ACI) rat strain.
Recordings of TC neurons between postnatal day (P) 7 and P90 in both rat strains revealed that I(h) was characterized by higher current density, more hyperpolarized voltage dependence, faster activation kinetics, and reduced cAMP-sensitivity in epileptic animals.
However, the precise role of BDNF and trkB receptor in the primary sensory neurons of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) during inflammation remains to be clarified.
Norepinephrine reduces -conotoxin-sensitive Ca2+ currents in renal afferent neurons in rats.
We tested the hypothesis that norepinephrine (NE) influences voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel currents in cultured renal dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, i.e., the first-order neuron of the renal afferent pathway.
DRG neurons (T11-L2) retrogradely labeled from the kidney and subsequently cultured, were investigated by whole-cell patch clamp.
Increased levels of SV2A botulinum neurotoxin receptor in clinical sensory disorders and functional effects of botulinum toxins A and E in cultured human sensory neurons.
There is increasing evidence that botulinum neurotoxin A may affect sensory nociceptor fibers, but the expression of its receptors in clinical pain states, and its effects in human sensory neurons, are largely unknown.
We studied synaptic vesicle protein subtype SV2A, a receptor for botulinum neurotoxin A, by immunostaining in a range of clinical tissues, including human dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons, peripheral nerves, the urinary bladder, and the colon.
We also determined the effects of botulinum neurotoxins A and E on localization of the capsaicin receptor, TRPV1, and functional sensitivity to capsaicin stimuli in cultured human dorsal root ganglion neurons.
In vitro studies of botulinum neurotoxin A-treated and botulinum neurotoxin E-treated cultured human sensory neurons showed accumulation of cytoplasmic vesicles, neurite loss, and reduced immunofluorescence for the heat and capsaicin receptor, TRPV1.
In vitro studies indicate that treatment with botulinum neurotoxins A and E may affect receptor expression and nociceptor function in sensory neurons.
There was no change in theta modulation of simultaneously recorded entorhinal interneurons.
Disparate changes in the expression of transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 receptor mRNA and protein in dorsal root ganglion neurons following local capsaicin treatment of the sciatic nerve in the rat.
In control rats, quantitative morphometric and statistical analyses of TRPV1 protein and mRNA expression in L5 dorsal root ganglion cells revealed distinct populations of small (type C) and small-to-medium (type B) neurons, which showed very high and moderate levels of TRPV1, whereas larger (type A) neurons mostly did not express this receptor.
After either transection or capsaicin treatment of the sciatic nerve, immunohistochemistry and Western blotting demonstrated a massive (up to 80%) decrease in the proportion of TRPV1-immunoreactive neurons and TRPV1 protein at all postoperative survival times.
In situ hybridization indicated marked decreases (up to 85%) in the proportion of neurons that expressed TRPV1 mRNA after sciatic nerve transection.
In contrast, although perineural treatment with capsaicin resulted in similar substantial decreases in the proportions of type B and C neurons of the L5 dorsal root ganglia 3 days postoperatively, a clear-cut tendency to recovery was observed thereafter.
Hence, the proportions of both type B and C neurons expressing TRPV1 mRNA reached up to 70% of the control levels at 30 days postoperatively.
These observations suggest the involvement of distinct cellular mechanisms in the regulation of the TRPV1 mRNA expression of damaged neurons, specifically triggered by the nature of the injury.
Relay neurons in dorsal thalamic nuclei can fire high-frequency bursts of action potentials that ride the crest of voltage-dependent transient (T-type) calcium currents [low-threshold spike (LTS)].
To explore potential nucleus-specific burst features, we compared the membrane properties of dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN) and pulvinar nucleus relay neurons using in vitro whole-cell recording in juvenile and adult tree shrew (Tupaia) tissue slices.
We injected current ramps of variable slope into neurons that were sufficiently hyperpolarized to de-inactivate T-type calcium channels.
In a small percentage of juvenile pulvinar and dLGN neurons, an LTS could not be evoked.
In the remaining juvenile neurons and in all adult dLGN neurons, a single LTS could be evoked by current ramps.
However, in the adult pulvinar, current ramps evoked multiple LTSs in >70% of recorded neurons.
Using immunohistochemistry, Western blot techniques, unbiased stereology, and confocal and electron microscopy, we found that pulvinar neurons expressed more T-type calcium channels (Ca(v) 3.2) and more small conductance potassium channels (SK2) than dLGN neurons and that the pulvinar nucleus contained a higher glia-to-neuron ratio than the dLGN.
The intrinsic properties of pulvinar neurons that promote burst firing in the adult may be relevant to the treatment of conditions that involve the adult onset of aberrant thalamocortical interactions.
The chemokine CCL2 increases Nav1.8 sodium channel activity in primary sensory neurons through a G-dependent mechanism.
Changes in function of voltage-gated sodium channels in nociceptive primary sensory neurons participate in the development of peripheral hyperexcitability that occurs in neuropathic and inflammatory chronic pain conditions.
Among them, the tetrodotoxin-resistant (TTX-R) sodium channel Na(v)1.8, primarily expressed by small- and medium-sized dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, substantially contributes to the upstroke of action potential in these neurons.
In this study, we therefore investigated the effects of CCL2 on the density and kinetic properties of TTX-R Na(v)1.8 currents in acutely small/medium dissociated lumbar DRG neurons from naive adult rats.
Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings demonstrated that CCL2 concentration-dependently increased TTX-resistant Na(v)1.8 current densities in both small- and medium-diameter sensory neurons.
Incubation with CCL2 also shifted the activation and steady-state inactivation curves of Na(v)1.8 in a hyperpolarizing direction in small sensory neurons.
No change in the activation and inactivation kinetics was, however, observed in medium-sized nociceptive neurons.
Furthermore, the enhancement in Na(v)1.8 currents was prevented by pretreatment with pertussis toxin (PTX) or gallein (a G inhibitor), indicating the involvement of G released from PTX-sensitive G(i/o)-proteins in the cross talk between CCR2 and Na(v)1.8. Together, our data clearly demonstrate that CCL2 may excite primary sensory neurons by acting on the biophysical properties of Na(v)1.8 currents via a CCR2/G-dependent mechanism.
Highly expressed within the CNS, we have previously demonstrated the functional expression of these channels in CA1 pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus.
Disruption of neural crest Trpm7 at early stages results in loss of pigment cells and dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Trpm7(-/-) NS cells retained the capacities of self-renewal and differentiation into neurons and astrocytes.
Imiquimod enhances excitability of dorsal root ganglion neurons by inhibiting background (K2P) and voltage-gated (Kv1.1 and Kv1.2) potassium channels.
A recent report suggested a molecular target of IQ as TLR7 expressed in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons.
However, we recently proposed a TLR7-independent mechanism, in which the activation of TLR7 is not required for the action of IQ in DRG neurons.
To resolve this controversy regarding the involvement of TLR7 and to address the exact molecular identity of itching sensation by IQ, we investigated the possible molecular target of IQ in DRG neurons.
When IQ was applied to DRG neurons, we observed an increase in action potential (AP) duration and membrane resistance both in wild type and TLR7-deficient mice.
Our results demonstrate that IQ blocks the voltage-gated K+ channels to increase AP duration and K2P channels to increase membrane resistance, which are critical for the membrane excitability of DRG neurons.
Therefore, we propose that IQ enhances the excitability of DRG neurons by blocking multiple potassium channels and causing pruritus.
Involvement of substance P neurons in contractions of canine small intestine produced by mesenteric nerve stimulation.
It may therefore be suggested that extrinsic SP neurons probably originating in spinal ganglia and intrinsic SP neurons receiving input from vagal preganglionic cholinergic neurons are involved in the excitatory pathways to MNS-induced contractions and that activation of these neurons excites myenteric cholinergic neurons, thereby causing contractions of the small intestine.
Capsaicin causes uptake of 45Ca2+ into a subset of neurons cultured from rat dorsal root ganglia.
We suggest that the active aryl azide is a photoaffinity label for a specific capsaicin receptor on dorsal root ganglion neurons but the inhibitory effects are not dependent on binding to the receptor.
It becomes apparent that there was an inverse pathological pattern between the fascia dentata granule cells and the Ammon's horn CA3 pyramidal neurons.
The hypothesis of "hyperexcitory" and "hyperstimulatory" damage of neurons was proposed.
In view that this inverse relationship also exists between the entorhinal cortical cells and the fascia dentate granule cells as well as between the CA3 and CA1,2 neurons in the Ammon's horn, a theory on the hyperexcitory cascade between the entorhinal cortex----fascia dentate----CA3----CA1,2 neurons was constructed.
Postnatal development of GABA-ergic neurons in the rabbit retina.
Uptake, synthesis, storage, and release of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) are some of the characteristic properties of GABA-ergic neurons.
In the present study, we have used these properties as physiological probes to follow the emergence and maturation of GABA-ergic neurons during postnatal development of the rabbit retina.
There is autoradiographic, immunocytochemical, and pharmacological evidence that some amacrine cells and certain neurons in the ganglion cell layer probably use GABA as the neurotransmitter.
These neurons take up GABA, contain the GABA-synthesizing enzyme L-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD, EC 4.1.1.15), and release the accumulated GABA by a CA++-dependent mechanism when depolorized with high extracellular K+ concentration.
In this study, we show that certain neurons in the newborn retina already possess a specific mechanism for GABA uptake.
The positions and numbers of these cells in the developing retina suggest that they will become GABA-ergic neurons in the adult retina.
These putative GABA-ergic neurons are, however, probably immature at birth because newborn retinas contain only low levels of GABA and GAD.
Taken together, our results indicate that in the rabbit retina, the commitment by certain neurons to use GABA as the transmitter is made prenatally.
These neurons are immature at birth but are biochemically, physiologically, and probably functionally mature by about 9 days after birth.
The data is consistent with most of them being inhibitory interneurons, but this is not established.
Calcium channels having alpha 1A subunits were concentrated in presynaptic terminals making synapses on cell bodies and on dendritic shafts and spines of many classes of neurons and were especially prominent in the synapses of the parallel fibers of cerebellar granule cells on Purkinje neurons where their localization in presynaptic terminals was confirmed by double labeling with the synaptic membrane protein syntaxin or the microinjected postsynaptic marker Neurobiotin.
They were present in lower density in the surface membrane of dendrites of most major classes of neurons.
There was substantial labeling of Purkinje cell bodies, but less intense staining of the cell bodies of hippocampal pyramidal neurons, layer V pyramidal neurons in the dorsal cortex, and most other classes of neurons in the forebrain and cerebellum.
These results define a unique pattern of localization of class A calcium channels in the cell bodies, dendrites, and presynaptic terminals of most central neurons.
In mammalian parasympathetic and dorsal root ganglion neurons, L-type Ca2+ channels are potentiated by single depolarizing prepulses or trains of short high-frequency depolarizing pulses.
We propose that the potentiation of L-type Ca2+ channel currents in neurons is due to state-dependent phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (Sculptoreanu, A., T. Scheuer, and W.
Thus state-dependent phosphorylation in neurons may be a mechanism for the regulation of various functions including transmitter release.
Characterization of pharmacologically identified voltage-gated calcium channel currents in acutely isolated rat neocortical neurons.
I. Adult neurons.
Whole cell recordings were obtained from pyramidal neurons acutely dissociated from the sensorimotor cortex of adult rats.
Characterization of pharmacologically identified voltage-gated calcium channel currents in acutely isolated rat neocortical neurons.
Whole cell recordings were obtained from pyramidal neurons acutely dissociated from the sensorimotor cortex of adult (from Lorenzon and Foehring, companion paper) and immature rats postnatal day 1 (P1) to adult.
A novel, abundant sodium channel expressed in neurons and glia.
In situ hybridization demonstrated that a wide variety of neurons express NaCh6, including motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, cerebellar granule cells, and pyramidal and granule cells of the hippocampus.
Thus, this sodium channel is broadly distributed throughout the nervous system and is shown to be expressed in both neurons and glial cells.
Developmental changes in presynaptic calcium channels coupled to glutamate release in cultured rat hippocampal neurons.
Hippocampal pyramidal neurons in cell culture were used to examine the participation of these two classes of channels at different stages of synapse development.
Specific Ca2+ channel toxins were used to block presynaptic Ca2+ channels while whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings were used to record evoked EPSCs in postsynaptic neurons.
Neurokinin 1 and 2 antagonists attenuate the responses and NK1 antagonists prevent the sensitization of primate spinothalamic tract neurons after intradermal capsaicin.
Activation of neurokinin receptors contributes to the excitation of many dorsal horn neurons by cutaneous sensory stimuli, particularly noxious stimuli.
In the present study we investigate the role of neurokinin receptors in the activation of primate spinothalamic tract (STT) neurons by cutaneous mechanical stimuli and by intradermal injection of capsaicin.
This was done by testing the responses of these neurons to a battery of cutaneous stimuli before and during infusion by microdialysis of antagonists selective for NK1 and NK2 receptors.
Both NK1 antagonists did, however, produce a significant reduction in the responses of STT neurons to an intradermal injection of capsaicin.
Neither NK2 antagonist affected the responses of STT neurons to noxious or innocuous mechanical stimulation of the skin, but they did reduce the responses to intradermal capsaicin injections.
NK1 receptors are also involved in the sensitization of STT neurons after peripheral injury.
Visualization by [3H]resiniferatoxin autoradiography of capsaicin-sensitive neurons in the rat, pig and man.
[3H]Resiniferatoxin autoradiography revealed high densities of binding sites in rat dorsal root ganglia as well as in the superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord, known to contain the cell bodies and central terminals, respectively, of capsaicin-sensitive, sensory neurons.
We conclude that [3H]resiniferatoxin autoradiography may afford a novel neurochemical tool to identify capsaicin-sensitive neurons in the central as well as in the peripheral nervous system, to explore the ontogeny of these neurons, and to detect changes in vanilloid (capsaicin) receptor expression under pathophysiological conditions.
The antennae of male M. brassicae bear two types of specialist receptor neurons involved in pheromone communication.
Three novel types of voltage-dependent calcium channels in rat cerebellar neurons.
With the aim of characterizing the functional and pharmacological properties of the different voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels expressed in a given type of CNS neuron, we obtained single Ca2+ channel recordings from rat cerebellar granule cells in primary culture.
The general anesthetic propofol inhibits transmembrane calcium current in chick sensory neurons.
The action of propofol on voltage-gated calcium channels was investigated in cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons from chick embryos.
Only the L-type component was strongly depressed (75%) by propofol (P < 0.001); different effects on the HVA current might, therefore, reflect different percentages of L- and N-type channels in neurons.
The selective activation of dorsal horn neurons by potassium stimulation of high threshold primary afferent neurons in vitro.
Intracellular recordings from neurons in the dorsal root ganglion and dorsal horn, in an in vitro spinal cord-dorsal root ganglion preparation, were used to investigate the role of large and small afferent fibers in the sensory synaptic transmission of the superficial dorsal horn.
Raising the extracellular potassium concentration from 3.1 to 25-50 mM in the dorsal root ganglion compartment evoked a large amplitude depolarization and blocked action potentials in the large neurons of dorsal root ganglion, and it synaptically excited dorsal horn neurons.
Tetrodotoxin (0.3-10 microM), when applied to the sensory neurons, abolished action potentials in large myelinated fibers but had no effect on the potassium-induced depolarization of the soma of large neurons of the dorsal root ganglion.
Bath application of tetrodotoxin to the dorsal root ganglion blocked the postsynaptic potentials evoked in dorsal horn neurons by electrical stimulation of large fibers (stimulus intensity 10-20V, 0.02 ms) but failed to block postsynaptic potentials induced by electrical stimulation of slow fibers (stimulus intensity > 35 V, 0.5 ms).
In addition, the tetrodotoxin failed to block the synaptic activation of dorsal horn neurons which was induced by the application of high potassium to sensory neurons.
Capsaicin (10-100 microM, 10 s), applied to the sensory neurons, resulted in a prolonged synaptic activation of the dorsal horn neurons and a subsequent long lasting desensitization.
During the period of capsaicin desensitization, synaptic activation of dorsal horn neurons by application of high potassium to the dorsal root ganglion and electrical stimulation of slow fibers was blocked.
The opioid receptor agonist (D-Ala2, D-Leu5)-enkephalinamide (1 microM), applied to the spinal cord slice, abolished the dorsal horn neuron excitation evoked by electrical or chemical activation of slow primary afferent fibers.
Granule neurons purified from weaver cerebella have greatly reduced G protein-activated inwardly rectifying K+ currents; instead, they display a constitutive Na+ conductance.
Because channel subunits may assemble as heteromultimers, additional functional characterization based on overlapping expression patterns may help to decipher the native K+ channels in neurons and glial cells.
Thus, the increased Na+ permeability and resulting depolarization may contribute to the pathology of cerebellar granule cells and substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons observed in the weaver mice.
Ultrastructural localization of the plasmalemmal calcium pump in cerebellar neurons.
This study shows that a specific calcium ATPase pump protein is located on the plasmalemma of certain types of cerebellar neurons.
The close association between P-type calcium channels and the plasma membrane calcium pump is consistent with rapid extrusion of intracellular calcium from neurons endowed with large numbers of voltage-gated calcium channels.
The observation that omega-agatoxin-IVA, which does not effect N-type Ca2+ channels (Mintz et al. (1992a) Neuron 9, 85), is capable of completely suppressing the fEPSP suggests that, whilst N-type Ca2+ channels may contribute to normal synaptic transmission at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses, they are not capable of supporting transmission when Q-type channels are blocked.
Functional diversity of P-type and R-type calcium channels in rat cerebellar neurons.
delta anion was genetically altered in cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons via adenoviral vector-mediated expression of ClC-2, a Cl- channel postulated to regulate the Cl- concentration in neurons in which GABAA receptor activation is predominantly inhibitory.
These results establish that gene transfer of transmembrane ion channels to neurons can be used to demonstrate their physiological function, and that delta anion can be genetically manipulated to alter the function of neuronal GABAA receptors in situ.
These polyamines are critically evaluated for antagonism of three high-threshold calcium channel subtypes in rat neurons through the use of the whole-cell patch-clamp technique.
These data show that both sFTX-3.3 and FTX-3.3 antagonize P-, N-, and L-type calcium channels in mammalian Purkinje and superior cervical ganglia neurons with similar IC50 values.
Thus, we tested the hypothesis that mGluRs coupled to potentiation of cAMP accumulation were present on glia rather than neurons in area CA1.
However, L-AA and FC had no discernible effects on viability of CA1 pyramidal cells, or cAMP-mediated electrophysiological effects in these neurons.
Pre-incubation of hippocampal slices with the neurotoxin kainate resulted in disruption of neuronal transmission and degeneration of neurons in area CA1, but had no effect on mGluR-mediated potentiation of cAMP accumulation.
Taken together, these data suggest that mGluRs coupled to potentiation of cAMP accumulation are present on glia rather than neurons in area CA1 of hippocampus.
We have developed a novel ligand, phorbol 12-phenylacetate 13-acetate 20-homovanillate (PPAHV), which binds to cultured rat sensory neurons (with a Ki of 3.1 +/- 0.4 microM), and induces Ca2+ uptake by them (with an ED50 of 1.8 +/- 0.3 microM) with similar affinities and in a non-cooperative manner (Hill coefficients are 0.99 and 1.06 for binding and Ca2+ uptake, respectively).
P/Q-type Ca2+ channels, which are formed by alpha 1A subunits, are mainly responsible for depolarization-dependent presynaptic Ca2+ entry in motor neurons.
We conclude that micromolar concentrations of aminoglycosides block not only N-type but also P/Q-type channels in mammalian neurons.
12, 462-467] Ca2+ binding protein encoded by a neuron-specific gene.
In this paper, we describe the detailed expression pattern of the rat hippocalcin gene, the gene structure and its neuron-specific promoter.
Opposite developmental regulation of P- and Q-type calcium currents during ontogenesis of large diameter mouse sensory neurons.
We investigated non-N, non-L Ba2+ currents through Ca2+ channels in freshly dissociated large diameter embryonic mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons using the whole-cell patch-clamp technique.
In conclusion, our results clearly show that P- and Q-type Ca2+ currents are differentially expressed during ontogenesis in large diameter dorsal root ganglion neurons.
The developmental change, which occurs during the period of target innervation, could be related to specific key events such as natural neuron death and onset of synapse formation.
Two types of BK channels in immature rat neocortical pyramidal neurons.
The properties of large conductance Ca(2+)-activated K+ channels (BK channels) were investigaed in neocortical infragranular pyramidal neurons by the use of inside-out patch recordings.
Neurons were acutely isolated from slices of newborn to 28-day-old rats (P0-P28) by using minimal protease exposure followed by trituration with a vibrating glass probe.
Two types of BK channels, slow-gating and fast-gating, were observed in immature neurons (P0-P5), whereas only slow-gating BK were found in more mature neurons.
Differential distribution of tyrosine hydroxylase fibers on small and large neurons in layer II of anterior cingulate cortex of schizophrenic brain.
A series of recent postmortem investigations of the anterior cingulate cortex in schizophrenic brain have suggested that there may be a loss and/or impairment of inhibitory interneurons in layer II.
It has been postulated that changes of this type could secondarily result in a relative increase of dopaminergic inputs to GABAergic interneurons.
The number of TH-IR varicosities in contact with large neurons (LN), small neurons (SN), and neuropil (NPL) was blindly analyzed using a computer-assisted microscopic technique.
In the anterior cingulate region, however, there may be a significant shift in the distribution of TH-IR varicosities from large neurons to small neurons that occurs selectively in layer II of schizophrenic subjects.
Using size criteria, the majority of small neurons are likely nonpyramidal, while the majority of large neurons are predominantly pyramidal in nature.
Taken together with other accumulating evidence of preferential abnormalities in this lamina of the cingulate region, the findings reported here are consistent with a model of schizophrenia in which a subtle "miswiring" of ventral tegmental inputs may result in a relative, though not absolute, hyperdopaminergic state with respect to an impaired population of GABAergic interneurons.
Identification of PN1, a predominant voltage-dependent sodium channel expressed principally in peripheral neurons.
We now describe the deduced primary structure of a sodium channel, peripheral nerve type 1 (PN1), which is expressed at high levels throughout the peripheral nervous system and is targeted to nerve terminals of cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons.
Treatment with 1 mg/kg muscimol led to further significant decreases of Fos expression in CA1-3 pyramidal neurons and the disappearance of Fos induction in the cerebral cortex above the rhinal fissure, reticular thalamic nucleus, claustrum, fundus striati, ventral pallidum, septal nucleus, lateral habenular nucleus, and lateral amygdaloid nucleus.
High densities of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity were observed in motoneuron of the ventral horn, deeper laminae and nucleus dorsalis of the dorsal horn.
Higher magnification of ventral horn showed strong immunostaining of motoneuron perikaryas and their proximal processes.
These interneurons, morphologically corresponding to islets and antenna-type cells project dendrites to adjacent laminae.
Furthermore, numerous strongly marked dendrites, transversally cut, suggest the presence of projection neurons to higher cervical centres.
In contrast, significant decreases of immunodeposits were observed in both cell bodies and numerous dendrites of motoneuron surrounding neuropil.
Dorsal root ganglion neurons express a wide repertoire of sodium channels with different properties.
Within the rat DRG, both the mRNA and PN1-like immunoreactivity are present in small and large neurons.
These structures were composed of ubiquitin-positive granular structures (UPG), ubiquitin-positive neuritic structures (UPN), spheroidal structures, neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), Lewy bodies (LB) and ubiquitin-positive neurons.
After perforating the stratum pyramidale and giving off terminal branches (ubiquitin-positive neurons or neuritic plaques with degenerative neurites), it was thought to run along the stratum radiatum and continue along the stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus, forming synapses with the apical dendrites from the stratum pyramidale and the stratum granulosum (spheroidal structures or neuritic plaques).
Thus, it appears that non-inactivating L-type calcium channels are appropriate to mediate transmitter release in neurons whose physiological responses are sustained, graded potentials.
These results indicate that serotonin released from terminals in the hippocampus activates a 5-HT1a receptor on interneurons that suppresses their activity and thus enhances dentate granular cell population spike response to PP stimulation.
Differential activation and desensitization of sensory neurons by resiniferatoxin.
Recently, with use of rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons we have been able to dissociate the binding affinities of vanilloids from their potencies to induce 45Ca uptake, which suggests the existence of distinct classes of the vanilloid receptor ().
In the present study, we have demonstrated that the ultrapotent capsaicin analog resiniferatoxin (RTX) desensitized rat DRG neurons to the subsequent induction of 45Ca uptake by capsaicin and RTX with affinity and cooperativity similar to that found for [3H]RTX binding, contrasting with a approximately 10-fold weaker potency and lack of cooperativity to induce 45Ca uptake.
Our findings provide further support for the existence of vanilloid receptor subtypes on DRG neurons with distinct pharmacology and distinct patterns of desensitization.
Cationic modulation of 5-HT2 and 5-HT3 receptors in rat sensory neurons: the role of K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+.
In a subpopulation of large-diameter acutely dissociated DRG neurons recorded from using the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration, 5-HT produced an inward shift in the current required to hold cells at -60 mV.
The above data suggest that elevation of [K+]o or reduction of [Ca2+]o produced by rapid firing rates of sensory neurons will favor the expression of 5-HT3 responses over 5-HT2 responses.
Distribution of parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in brain correlates with hippocampal and temporal cortical pathology in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
There is a distinctive pattern of hippocampal involvement in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and evidence for selective vulnerability of GABAergic neurons in experimental and human prion disease.
We studied hippocampus and temporal cortex from human CJD and control autopsy brains and surgical cryptogenic temporal lobe epilepsy specimens for distribution and density of parvalbumin (PV) and calbindin-D28K (Cal) -positive neurons that are subpopulations of GABAergic neurons.
In CJD, pathology was severe in pre-parasubiculum and temporal cortex, and little or absent in CA1-4; PV+ neurons were severely reduced or absent in all cases, whereas Cal+ neurons were largely preserved.
In controls, the density of PV+ neurons was highest in pre-parasubiculum and temporal cortex, and lowest in CA1-4.
In cTLE, loss of PV+ neurons was seen only in CA1-4.
The diffuse and severe loss of PV+ neurons in CJD, and the topographical correlation of tissue lesioning in CJD with density of PV+ neurons in controls suggest selective vulnerability and early loss of this subset of inhibitory neurons in CJD.
Developmental changes in GABA neurons of the rat dentate gyrus: an in situ hybridization and birthdating study.
The temporal and spatial distribution of glutamate decarboxylase 67 (GAD67) mRNA-containing neurons in the dentate gyrus was analyzed from embryonic day 20 (E20) to postnatal day 15 (PN15) with nonradioactive in situ hybridization methods.
A major goal was to follow the development of an early-appearing population of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurons within the developing molecular layer.
At E20, GAD67 mRNA-containing neurons were highly concentrated slightly above the outer border of the developing granule cell layer.
By PN3-PN5, many labeled cells were distributed within the developing granule cell layer; by PN15, labeled neurons occupied positions normally seen in the adult, such as along the inner border of the granule cell layer.
Birthdating studies of neurons labeled with bromodeoxyuridine revealed a changing pattern, similar to that of GAD67 mRNA, for cells with birthdates (E14) of many of the mature GAD-containing neurons in the dentate gyrus.
The changes in the mRNA and birthdating patterns from E20-PN15 suggest that some of the early-appearing GABA neurons within the developing molecular layer of the dentate gyrus may alter their positions to eventually become the mature GABA population along the inner border of the granule cell layer.
Taken together, the properties of Kv4 channels compare best with those of low-voltage activating "A-currents" present in the neuronal somatodendritic compartment and widely reported across several types of central and peripheral neurons, as well as the (Ca2+-independent) transient outward potassium conductance of heart cells (Ito).
In the hippocampus Kv4.2 is the most abundant isoform in CA1 pyramidal cells, whereas only Kv4.3 is expressed in interneurons.
In the cerebellum Kv4.3, but not Kv4.2, is expressed in Purkinje cells and molecular layer interneurons.
We found that omega-conotoxin GVIA (omega-CgTx GVIA), a specific antagonist of N-type calcium channel, rather than the synthetic funnel-web spider toxin (sFTX), a P-type channel antagonist, blocks the majority of the barium current flowing through calcium channels in chick Purkinje neurons.
N-type HVA calcium channels of rat dorsal root ganglion neurons are blocked with affinity in the sub-nanomolar concentration range.
The unique persistent current observed for Scn8a channels is consistent with the hypothesis that this channel is responsible for distinct sodium conductances underlying repetitive firing of action potentials in Purkinje neurons.
With the use of intracellular recordings, we investigated the effects of serotonin on synaptic inhibition of layer II and III neurons of the EC.
Serotonin reduced both polysynaptic fast and slow inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) in projection neurons of the superficial EC.
To look at the direct effects of 5-HT on inhibitory interneurons, we elicited monosynaptic IPSPs in the absence of excitatory synaptic transmission.
Recordings from putative inhibitory interneurons revealed that their excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) were reversibly reduced by serotonin.
We conclude that serotonin suppresses polysynaptic inhibition in projection neurons of layers II and III of the EC by depression of EPSPs on inhibitory interneurons via 5-HT1A receptors.
The serotonin inhibition of high-voltage-activated calcium currents is relieved by action potential-like depolarizations in dissociated cholinergic nucleus basalis neurons of the guinea-pig.
In dissociated cholinergic basal forebrain neurons using whole-cell recordings, it is shown that a selective serotonin 5-HT1A agonist (8-OH-DPAT) predominantly blocks N-type HVA calcium current, although a minor reduction of P-type current was also observed.
This observation may have important implications during periods of high-frequency rhythmic bursts, a firing pattern that is prevalent in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons.
Selective activation of Ca2+-activated K+ channels by co-localized Ca2+ channels in hippocampal neurons.
In hippocampal neurons, activation of BK channels underlies the falling phase of an action potential and generation of the fast afterhyperpolarization (AHP).
Here we study channel activity in cell-attached patches from hippocampal neurons and report a unique specificity of coupling.
Capsaicin depletes the sensory neuropeptide substance P (SP) in the rat due to a combination of neuron loss and decreased synthesis in the surviving cells.
The present findings suggest that RTX does not kill SP-positive DRG neurons, though it suppresses the synthesis of SP.
Characterization of G-protein-gated K+ channels composed of Kir3.2 subunits in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra.
The channels were localized specifically at the postsynaptic membrane on the dendrites of dopaminergic neurons.
This study reveals that the Kir3.2 splicing variants play distinct roles in the control of function and localization of some of the KG channels in dopaminergic neurons of SN.
Tyrosine phosphorylation downregulates a potassium current in rat olfactory bulb neurons and a cloned Kv1.3 channel.
We are studying the regulation of ion channels by protein tyrosine kinases (TKs) using olfactory bulb neurons (OBNs) and a cloned voltage-dependent potassium channel, Kv1.3, as models.
The membrane permeant tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, pervanadate, was found to suppress current in a subset of neurons, implying the presence of an endogenous tyrosine kinase in these neurons.
