Inhibition of persistent sodium current fraction and voltage-gated L-type calcium current by propofol in cortical neurons: implications for its antiepileptic activity.
Although it is widely used in clinical practice, the mechanisms of action of 2,6-di-isopropylphenol (propofol) are not completely understood. We examined the electrophysiologic effects of propofol on an in vitro model of epileptic activity obtained from a slice preparation. The effects of propofol were tested both on membrane properties and on epileptiform events consisting of long-lasting, paroxysmal depolarization shifts (PDSs) induced by reducing the magnesium concentration from the solution and by adding bicuculline and 4-aminopyridine. These results were integrated with a patch-clamp analysis of Na(+) and high-voltage activated (HVA) calcium (Ca(2+)) currents from isolated cortical neurons. In bicuculline, to avoid any interference by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-A receptors, propofol (3-100 microM) did not cause significant changes in the current-evoked, sodium (Na(+))-dependent action-potential discharge. However, propofol reduced both the duration and the number of spikes of PDSs recorded from cortical neurons. Interestingly, relatively low concentrations of propofol [half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)), 3.9 microM) consistently inhibited the "persistent" fraction of Na(+) currents, whereas even high doses (< or =300 microM) had negligible effects on the "fast" component of Na(+) currents. HVA Ca(2+) currents were significantly reduced by propofol, and the pharmacologic analysis of this effect showed that propofol selectively reduced L-type HVA Ca(2+) currents, without affecting N or P/Q-type channels. These results suggest that propofol modulates neuronal excitability by selectively suppressing persistent Na(+) currents and L-type HVA Ca(2+) conductances in cortical neurons. These effects might cooperate with the opening of GABA-A-gated chloride channels, to achieve depression of cortical activity during both anesthesia and status epilepticus.
