Impaired antibody synthesis after spinal cord injury is level dependent and is due to sympathetic nervous system dysregulation.
Individuals with spinal cord injury (SCI) are highly susceptible to infection. This post-traumatic immune suppression is thought to occur via alterations in sympathetic nervous system (SNS) or hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function. Normally, the HPA axis and SNS help coordinate proper immune function. After SCI, the HPA axis becomes activated and descending input to sympathetic preganglionic neurons (SPNs) is impaired. Because lymphoid organs are innervated by SPNs distributed throughout the thoracolumbar spinal cord, we predicted level-dependent immune suppression after SCI due to activation of the HPA axis and loss of descending input to SPNs. We tested this hypothesis by measuring indices of HPA (circulating corticosterone; CORT) and SNS function (norepinephrine (NE) in spleen) as well as antigen-specific antibody synthesis against an exogenous non-self protein following high- or low-level SCI. Using a mid-thoracic (T9) spinal contusion injury model, we found that CORT was elevated after SCI with aberrant patterns of diurnal CORT synthesis evident through at least the first 24 h post-injury. However, splenic NE and antibody synthesis were similar to uninjured controls. Injury severity did not change these parameters. Indeed, CORT, NE and antibody synthesis were similar after T9 contusion or transection SCI. In contrast, high-level SCI (T3) caused sustained increases in CORT and splenic NE along with impaired antibody synthesis and elevated splenocyte apoptosis. The immunosuppressive effects of T3 SCI were caused by NE acting at beta2-adrenergic receptors (beta2AR) and could be reversed using beta2AR blockers. Interestingly, impaired antibody after T3 SCI could be mimicked after T9 SCI with a beta2AR agonist. These data illustrate the immunosuppressive effects of the SNS after high-level SCI and indicate that immune deficits may be overcome using beta-blockers.
