A comparison of the effect of calcium channel ligands and GABAB agonists and antagonists on transmitter release and somatic calcium channel currents in cultured neurons.
Glutamate release has been examined from cultured cerebellar granule neurons in the rat using the technique of prelabelling the releasable pool of glutamate with [3H]glutamine. Glutamate release was stimulated in control neurons by 2-min incubation with 50 mM K+, or in neurons continuously depolarized in Ca2(+)-free 50 mM K+ medium, by 2-min incubation with medium containing 5 mM Ca2+. The ability of the Ca2(+)-channel agonist (+)-202-791 to increase the stimulated release of [3H]glutamate was approximately doubled in the depolarized condition. The antagonist enantiomer (-)-202-791 produced a small inhibition of K(+)-stimulated release, whereas (-)-202-791 completely inhibited Ca2(+)-stimulated release from depolarized neurons at concentrations greater than 10 nM. (-)-Baclofen (100 microM) inhibited transmitter release similarly (25-30%) under the two conditions. Calcium-channel currents were recorded from cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons under control conditions at a holding potential of -80 mV, or in neurons depolarized to -30 mV. (-)-202-791 produced a greater effect at -30 than at -80 mV although even at -30 mV the inhibition was slow in onset and incomplete. (-)-Baclofen (100 microM) inhibited the amplitude of the calcium-channel current at both holding potentials by 30-50%, although it did not clearly slow activation of the current at the depolarized holding potential. The GABAB receptors associated with inhibition of glutamate release and of calcium-channel currents were both markedly blocked by phaclofen but not by 2-OH-saclofen. These findings suggest that the GABAB receptor associated with inhibitory modulation of transmitter release, and that associated with inhibition of calcium-channel currents show pharmacological similarities, and are able to exert their action even at levels of steady depolarization at which most N-type channels should be inactivated.
