Localization of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity in the rat spinal cord: effects of capsaicin, melittin, dorsal rhizotomy and peripheral axotomy.
A putative role for bradykinin has been proposed in the processing of sensory information at the level of the spinal cord. Autoradiographic studies have demonstrated the presence of B2 kinin receptor binding sites in superficial laminae of the dorsal horn and a down-regulation of those receptors in rat models of pain injury. In this study, classical immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy immunofluorescence were used first to localize bradykinin-like immunoreactivity in all major spinal cord segments of naive rats; second, to assess bradykinin-like immunoreactivity changes that occur in animals subjected to various chemical treatments and surgical lesions. High densities of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity were observed in motoneuron of the ventral horn, deeper laminae and nucleus dorsalis of the dorsal horn. Higher magnification of ventral horn showed strong immunostaining of motoneuron perikaryas and their proximal processes. Two types of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity immunostained cellular bodies were observed in deeper laminae of the dorsal horn. These interneurons, morphologically corresponding to islets and antenna-type cells project dendrites to adjacent laminae. Furthermore, numerous strongly marked dendrites, transversally cut, suggest the presence of projection neurons to higher cervical centres. Following unilateral lumbar dorsal rhizotomy (L1-L6) or peripheral lesion of the sciatic nerve, important increases of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity were found in laminae III and IV of the ipsilateral dorsal horn. In contrast, significant decreases of immunodeposits were observed in both cell bodies and numerous dendrites of motoneuron surrounding neuropil. Specific destructions of sensory afferent fibres with capsaicin or selective activation of kallikreins with melittin caused increases of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity in both the dorsal and ventral horns of the spinal cord. These results which demonstrate the cellular localization of bradykinin-like immunoreactivity in both dorsal and ventral horns of the rat spinal cord, further reveal the plasticity of this non-sensory peptidergic system following various chemical and surgical treatments. Hence, these anatomical findings along with earlier functional and receptor autoradiographic studies reinforce the putative role of bradykinin in sensory function.
